618 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Design Practice QUESTIONS
1. How do you plan to deal with the issue of new players arriving in the middle of 
a long game? Get rid of the victory condition, or ﬁ nd a way to make sure that play-
ers are matched with those of similar ability?
2. What will happen to the gameplay when a player vanishes? How will it affect 
the other players’ experience of the game (what they see and hear)? Does it disrupt 
the balance of the game? Will it make the challenges easier or harder? Is the game 
even meaningful anymore?
3. What happens to the game’s score when a player vanishes? Is the game still fair?
4. Does your game offer a player an advantage of some kind for intentionally dis-
connecting himself (whether by preventing himself from losing or by sealing his 
own victory)? Is there any way to minimize this without penalizing players who 
are disconnected accidentally?
5. In a turn-based game, what mechanism will you use to prevent a player from 
stalling play for the other players? Set a time limit? Allow simultaneous turns? 
Implement a reasonable default if the player does nothing?
6. If you offer a chat mechanism, what features will you implement to keep it civil? 
Filters? A complaint system? An ignore system? Or will your game require moder-
ated chat spaces?
7. Is your game designed to prevent (or alleviate) collusion? Because you can’t pre-
vent players from talking to each other on the phone as they play, how will you 
address this? Or can you design your game in such a way that collusion is part of 
the gameplay, as in Diplomacy?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX
619
Designing to Appeal to 
Particular Groups
In the concept stage of game design, you must choose a target audience for your 
game, and throughout development you must keep that audience in mind. This 
appendix brieﬂ y addresses some design considerations you should take into account
if you want to appeal to three groups long underserved by the game industry: adult 
women, children generally, and girls speciﬁ cally. We also brieﬂ y discuss accessibil-
ity issues for players with disabilities of various kinds, as well as resources for 
further research. If you plan to design with these groups in mind, it pays to give 
extra thought to, and do extra research on, their needs and interests.
Reaching Adult Women
But what if the player is female?
—SHERI GRANER RAY, GENDER INCLUSIVE GAME DESIGN
Women represent a gigantic portion of the gamer market. Audience research
shows that in the United States, more adult women (34 percent) than teenage boys 
(18 percent) play video games, a statistic that may surprise you (Entertainment 
Software Association, 2009). 
Men and women don’t differ nearly as much as various works of pop psychology 
would like us to believe. Few individuals conform completely to traditional stereo-
types of masculinity and femininity, and men’s and women’s interests overlap 
considerably. In Gender Blending, Holly Devor (Devor, 1989) quoted studies showing 
that as many as 50 percent of heterosexual women identiﬁ ed themselves as having 
been tomboys as children. Unfortunately, far too many game designers (and prod-
uct designers in general) treat men and women as entirely different species with 
little in common.
Gender Inclusiveness
To attract women players, you don’t have to make the game about stereotypically 
feminine interests such as fashion or shopping, any more than you have to make 
games about monster truck rallies to attract men. Rather, to make a game of interest 
to both sexes, you only need to avoid including material that discourages one group 
APPENDIX


--- PAGE BREAK ---

620 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
or the other from playing. To make a game that both sexes will play, don’t build 
content that will limit the interest of, or offend, either sex.
 The biggest turn-offs for women are usually:
■ Hypersexualized female avatars and other characters.
■ Repetitive, monotonous play.
■ Play without a meaningful goal. Simply racking up the highest score isn’t 
enough.
■ The solitary nature of single-player play. If you’re making a single-player game, 
there is nothing you can do about this; it’s just something to be aware of.
A Few Generalities
Having warned you not to treat men and women as polar opposites, this section 
offers a small number of generalities about how male and female play patterns tend 
to differ among Western men and women (the only group for which much research 
exists). These observations may not apply to women in Japan, China, Korea, or 
India—all important new markets for games.
■ Men and women like to learn differently. Women generally like to know what 
they will be expected to do before they have to do it rather than be thrown into 
the deep end to sink or swim. Unfortunately, this makes most arcade games unat-
tractive to women because arcade games make their money from the player’s 
ignorance.
■ Men and women have different attitudes toward risk. Women are more likely 
to avoid risks that they cannot compute. Men are more willing to experiment even 
if it means losing frequently.
■ Women are more interested in people than things and like to socialize as 
part of their play experience. This explains why online games are more successful 
than single-player games among female players: Online games allow the players to 
socialize.
■ Men and women have different conﬂ ict resolution styles. Women prefer that 
violence have a justiﬁ cation; ﬁ ghting for its own sake is of little interest to them. 
They are not opposed to violence per se, but they like the violence to be given a 
context, such as a story. Women also like to use lateral thinking to ﬁ nd alternatives 
to brute-force approaches.
■ Women enjoy mental challenges and ﬁ nding elegant solutions to problems.
This accounts for the popularity of puzzle games among women.
■ Women like to customize their avatars. Men often treat their avatar characters 
as puppets rather than people, someone simply to be controlled for the sake of win-
ning the game. Women tend to identify with their avatars more. A woman uses the 
NOTE For further 
reading, check out 
Gender Inclusive Game 
Design by Sheri Graner 
Ray (Ray, 2003). She 
discusses these issues 
in considerable detail.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGNING TO APPEAL TO PARTICULAR GROUPS 
621
APPENDIX
avatar as a means of self-expression and likes to be able to make the avatar look like 
herself or a fantasy version of herself.
Again, remember that these are generalities. Although they don’t describe every 
woman, you should be aware of them.
DESIGN RULE Women Are a Market, Not a Genre
Do not try to design a “women’s game” simply by creating features that address these 
generalities. Rather, design an intrinsically interesting game and bear these issues in 
mind as you consider the effect that your design decisions will have on your potential 
customer base.
Designing for Children
Video games for children differ from those for adults, just as books and television 
shows for them do. Nor is there one single type of game appropriate for children—
their motor and cognitive skills change throughout childhood. Here are the 
commonly recognized age categories:
■ Preschool and kindergarten (ages 3 to 6)
■ Early elementary (ages 5 to 8)
■ Upper elementary (ages 7 to 12, the tweens)
■ Middle and high school (13 and up, the teens)
Each of these groups has, on the whole, its own interests and abilities. Because we 
encourage children to aspire to adulthood and its privileges and discourage them 
from acting young (“don’t be a baby”), kids tend to scorn anything made for an age 
group younger than themselves. As a general rule, entertainment made for children 
of a certain age group will actually feature characters older than the players.
If you’re planning to make games for children, consider the following issues.
■ Hand-eye coordination. Young children’s motor skills are poorly developed at 
ﬁ rst, while those of teenagers often surpass those of adults.
■ Cognitive load. Children can solve puzzles just as adults can, but for younger 
children the puzzles shouldn’t be too complex. The number of elements involved 
must be fewer, and the chain of reasoning required must be shorter.
■ Frequent rewards. Games for older players often require the player to go 
through many steps before reaching a reward. We expect adult players to be patient 
and to regard their progress alone as sufﬁ cient reward. Children need feedback 
TIP If you want to 
learn more about 
childhood develop-
ment, study the work 
of psychologist Jean 
Piaget. His theories 
of cognitive develop-
ment have been hugely 
inﬂ uential on educa-
tion and many other 
ﬁ elds.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

622 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
more frequently. You don’t have to have a saccharine character say “Good job!” 
every single time they do something right, but provide a clear and pleasant indica-
tor of success.
■ Visual design. Young children don’t have as much experience as adults do at ﬁ l-
tering out irrelevant details, so keep the user interfaces in games for children simple 
and focused; make them deep rather than broad.
■ Linguistic complexity. Don’t talk down to children, but use age-appropriate 
vocabulary and syntax. Long sentences full of words that they don’t know turn 
kids off. Short sentences made up of carefully chosen words can still express quite 
sophisticated ideas; for an example, read Saint-Exupéry’s The Little Prince.
■ Appropriate content. This tricky area actually has more to do with what par-
ents want for their children than what the children want for themselves. Adult 
themes are not so much wrong for children as they are irrelevant. Children’s enter-
tainment needs to address children’s concerns. This is one of the reasons the early 
Harry Potter books are so brilliant; they capture children’s concerns perfectly. Kids 
easily identify with Harry’s feelings of alienation, being misunderstood by his fam-
ily, and his sense of latent but untapped promise. Even the emphasis on food in the 
early books is signiﬁ cant; for younger children, food is a major interest and a big 
part of their daily routine.
Carolyn Handler Miller, a longtime developer of entertainment for children, has 
devised a list of “Seven Kisses of Death,” features that drive children away rather 
than appealing to them. The Kisses of Death are widely held misconceptions about 
what children like, generally founded on what adults want them to like. 
■ Death Kiss #1: Kids love anything sweet. This holdover from Victorian ideals 
about childhood holds true for toddlers, but any child older than that knows the 
world isn’t sugarcoated and rejects the suggestion that it is. Think about the Warner 
Brothers cartoons: wisecracking Bugs Bunny; Sylvester the cat’s endless efforts to 
eat Tweety Bird; Wile E. Coyote’s similarly endless efforts to kill the Roadrunner; 
homicidal Yosemite Sam and rabbit-cidal Elmer Fudd. Kids love these cartoons—
which actually include a sneaky moral about violence redounding upon the 
violent—but there’s nothing remotely sweet about them.
■ Death Kiss #2: Give them what’s good for them. Kids are forever being told 
what’s good for them. They’re made to eat food they don’t like; they’re made to go 
to school; they’re made to do chores, learn to play the piano, and a million other 
things supposedly meant to build their characters or strengthen their bodies or 
minds. Most of this is reasonable and necessary, but not in an entertainment con-
text. How would you, as an adult, like to be fed a dose of propaganda with every 
book and TV show you saw? You wouldn’t, and neither do kids. When they want to 
relax and have fun, they don’t want a dose of medicine with it.
■ Death Kiss #3: You’ve just got to amuse them. This is the opposite of Death 
Kiss #2; it cynically assumes that kids are less discriminating than adults, so any 
NOTE For further 
reading on the Kisses 
of Death, consult
Carolyn Handler
Miller’s book Digital 
Storytelling, Second 
Edition: A Creator’s 
Guide to Interactive 
Entertainment (Miller, 
2008).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGNING TO APPEAL TO PARTICULAR GROUPS 
623
APPENDIX
old ﬂ uff will do. It won’t. Kids can’t tell the difference between good acting and 
bad acting, and they aren’t experienced enough to recognize clichéd plot lines, but 
they won’t put up with just anything. Walt Disney realized this, and so do the writ-
ers and animators who continue his work; Disney movies are multilayered even 
though they are for children. So, too, are the best children’s books. Meaningful 
content will keep a child’s attention longer than trivial content.
■ Death Kiss #4: Always play it safe! This is a variant of the “sweet” Death Kiss. 
Some people, in an effort to avoid violent or controversial content, go overboard 
and try to eliminate anything that might frighten or disturb a child or even raise 
her pulse. This inevitably results in bland, dull entertainment. Again, look at 
Disney ﬁ lms for good counter-examples: Dumbo’s separation from his mother; 
Snow White’s terriﬁ ed ﬂ ight through the forest; the outright murder of Simba’s 
father in The Lion King. These are not happy things, and that’s OK. Gerard Jones 
argues in his important treatment of the subject Killing Monsters: Why Children Need 
Fantasy, Super Heroes, and Make-Believe Violence (Jones, 2002) that learning to deal 
with threatening situations constitutes an important part of growing up.
■ Death Kiss #5: All kids are created equal. There’s no such thing as a single 
children’s market. Kids’ interests and abilities change too quickly to lump them all 
into a single category. If you’re planning to make a game for ages 6 to 10 and the 
publishers decide they want a game for ages 8 to 12, you’ll have to redesign the 
game. One-size-ﬁ ts-all deﬁ nitely doesn’t work with kids.
■ Death Kiss #6: Explain everything. Kids are much happier with trial-and-error 
than adults are, and they don’t want long introductions explaining how to play the 
game. They want to dive in and play. Above all, avoid talking heads with a lot of 
jabber. Adults naturally tend to assume that kids need things explained to them, 
but it’s not true of video game worlds in which they can’t hurt themselves or any-
thing else. Keep exposition—and especially anything that smacks of teaching 
them—to a minimum.
■ Death Kiss #7: Be sure your characters are wholesome! Wholesome equals 
boring. We wouldn’t put up with bland white-bread characters in entertainment for 
adults; why should we make children do it? You don’t have to introduce serial kill-
ers, but create real characters with their own personal foibles. Sesame Street
famously offered a variety of characters, many speciﬁ cally designed to represent 
moods or attitudes familiar to young children: greedy, grouchy, helpful, and so on.
Games for Girls
The game industry has always been overwhelmingly dominated by men, and male 
developers have tended to design games that they themselves would like (or would 
have liked when they were boys). Whether for societal or genetic reasons, boys’ and 
girls’ interests diverge more widely from one another than men’s and women’s do; 
on their respective bell-shaped curves, the means are farther apart. At certain ages, 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

624 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
boys and girls may ﬂ atly reject things (clothing, toys, or other symbols) associated 
with the opposite sex.
For most of the game industry’s history, no one made an effort to design games spe-
ciﬁ cally for girls or even to think much about what kinds of games girls would like. 
It was a catch-22 situation: If you proposed a game for girls to a publisher, you 
would be met with the reply, “Girls don’t play video games.” But, of course, the rea-
son girls didn’t play video games was that there weren’t many games they liked to 
play—or at least that was the general perception. (Further research showed that this 
was an unfounded stereotype; far more girls played games than people realized, 
even though no one was considering their interests.)
In the mid-1990s, a number of people realized that girls represented an untapped 
market, and several companies grew up to exploit it. Unfortunately, many of these 
early efforts were graphically poor and offered less value for the money than most 
other games. Girls want, and deserve, games just as good as those made for boys. 
More recently, several companies have started making games for girls again with 
more success. Most notable is Ubisoft’s Imagine series of games, which covers a
huge range of subjects. The Barbie, Bratz, and Nancy Drew licenses have all been 
steady earners. 
If you’re interested in making games for this market, remember that the audience is 
girls, not women. Adult women are naturally more diverse than children and have 
a wider variety of interests. Don’t assume that what applies to women also applies 
to girls generally.
Mattel’s Approach
If you want to make games speciﬁ cally for girls, as opposed to games that appeal to 
children of both sexes, you have to ask yourself what especially interests girls—and, 
perhaps more important, what does not interest girls. For the answer, you need look 
no farther than Mattel, manufacturer of Barbie, the single most famous toy for girls 
in the world. Mattel’s great success developing games for girls results from its 
understanding of its target market. (Mattel doesn’t publish software itself anymore; 
instead, it licenses its brands to others.)
Barbie’s success derives partly from the proven, time-tested formula she follows, 
and a well-targeted market: Mattel aims Barbie at a core age group from 4 to 8 years 
old. After that, girls’ interests change, and Mattel does not try for a one-size-ﬁ ts-all 
approach. The company has no social agenda and makes no claim of political 
correctness.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGNING TO APPEAL TO PARTICULAR GROUPS 
625
APPENDIX
JESYCA DURCHIN’S ADVICE
Jesyca Durchin owns the consulting company Nena Media (www.nenamedia.com), which 
creates media content for young girls, and she is a former executive producer for Mattel. 
At the 2000 Game Developers’ Conference, she gave an extremely useful summary 
(Durchin, 2000) of what she had learned about how girls in this age group play games:
Girls Have a Wide Variety of Interests.
It is vital to identify what type of girl is interested in your type of game. Girls are much 
more fragmented in their interests than boys. Girls change more rapidly, and their emo-
tional and intellectual growth happens differently. A girl has different needs in her playtime 
almost every year of her childhood—loosely deﬁ ned as being between ages 4 and 14.
Hinge Interactivity on Proven Play Patterns.
A play pattern is a traditional and almost instinctual way a child approaches an object or 
an activity to entertain herself. Girls traditionally value the following:
• Fashion play
• Glamour play
• Nurture play
• Adventure play
• Action/twitch play
• Collection play
• Communication/social play
As well as exercising their own imaginations, girls like to reproduce daily life in play. 
Barbie is a vehicle for projecting adult activities into a child’s world. Don’t be afraid of 
open-ended or non–goal-oriented play.
Here are a few more observations:
•
Girls like stuff. Stuff is what the girl can collect, display, or take away from the
product. It is incredibly important for the girl to feel there is a reason for her to play. In 
some ways, collecting stuff replaces the concept of scoring in traditional boy’s software. 
Collecting each one of a variety of shells, for example, is more interesting than trying to 
achieve a high, but abstract, numerical score.
•
Create environments that are attractive to girls. Girls like environments that are 
reality-based but either are beautiful or make sense to the storyline. Symmetry and color 
coherency are important to girls. Not everything has to be pink, purple, and pretty, but 
each environment should give the girl the feeling of being in another place. Girls (and 
boys) are highly imaginative, and they create alternative storylines in their own heads. 
Be aware that the girl’s imagination inﬂ uences her view of your environment.
continues on next page


--- PAGE BREAK ---

626 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
JESYCA DURCHIN’S ADVICE
continued
•
Girls appreciate sensual interfaces. Girls tend to respond more positively to what is 
sometimes referred to as the sensual interface. They need colorful, sound-driven inter-
faces that “feel” good. The interface needs to feel magical and needs to have what I call 
the brrrring factor. Don’t give girls a group of identical gray pushbuttons, no matter how 
logically organized they may be; give them buttons that ring and change shape and color.
•
Extend the play from existing toys or media into software. Branding is becoming 
more and more important in the business of software. It is doubly important in the girl’s 
software business because girls are still just getting involved in viewing the computer as 
an entertainment tool. Branding is important to rising above all the muck.
•
Don’t be ashamed of your work. If you’re embarrassed by what you’re doing, it will 
show. Do it wholeheartedly or don’t do it at all. Girls can tell if you’re ashamed of making 
games for them. If you’re uncomfortable using terms like “hair play” or “relationship 
games,” don’t bother.
Kaye Elling’s Five Cs
Kaye Elling was creative manager at Blitz Games on the Bratz series, and in 2006 
she gave an insightful lecture called “Inclusive Games Design” at the Animex festi-
val in the UK (Elling, 2006). Elling proposed ﬁ ve characteristics of games, all 
beginning with the letter C, that designers should strive for to make them more 
inclusive and accessible to girls.
■ Characterization. As Chapter 6, “Character Development,” discussed women 
(and girls) see avatars as someone who represents themselves rather than someone 
simply to control. Therefore, an avatar has to be someone girls can identify with, 
and to have no qualities they ﬁ nd distasteful.
■ Context. Environments matter to girls, and they will be repulsed by environ-
ments that they ﬁ nd ugly or hostile. This advice concurs with Jesyca Durchin’s 
thoughts in the sidebar “Jesyca Durchin’s Advice.”
■ Control. Girls like to feel as if they are in control of the game, rather than it
is in control of them. The risk-and-reward style of gameplay appeals less to girls 
because they don’t enjoy taking risks as much as boys do. They also dislike 
mechanics that harshly punish failure, because those mechanics discourage 
experimentation.
■ Customization. Girls customize their mobile phones and other accessories more 
than boys do, so it makes sense that they would want to customize their games as 
well—especially their avatars. Bratz: Rock Angelz offered 686 different items of 
TIP PuzzleQuest is 
a Nintendo DS role-
playing game that 
works very well for 
both boys and girls. 
Players can choose 
a male or female 
avatar, and combat is 
characterized as puzzle-
solving. When the 
player loses a battle, 
his avatar is not killed, 
but simply runs away 
and can try again later.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGNING TO APPEAL TO PARTICULAR GROUPS 
627
APPENDIX
clothing, makeup, jewelry, and so on. The more desirable ones are unlockable 
rewards the player can earn for completing mini-games.
■ Creativity. Creative play is a big part of what makes The Sims successful with 
girls and women. Creativity gives players a chance to express themselves and show 
off what they made to others. It’s not conﬁ ned to girl games by any means; even in 
Halo 2 players can design unique clan badges.
A Few Misconceptions
Because people see fewer girls than boys playing hardcore games, they tend to jump to 
conclusions about what girls want. This section corrects a few of these misconceptions.
■ Girls don’t like computer games because computers are techie. This is 
patently false. Although most girls and women generally are less fascinated by the 
technical details of computers than are boys and men, that doesn’t discourage 
them from playing computer games any more than automotive speciﬁ cations dis-
courage them from driving cars.
■ Girls don’t like violence. No, what girls don’t like is nonstop, meaningless vio-
lence. It’s not so much that they’re repulsed by it as that they’re bored by it. It 
doesn’t stimulate their imaginations. If you’ve seen one explosion, you’ve seen 
them all. Elling also points out that when violence is casual, sadistic, or excessively 
gory, it becomes brutality, and girls do not like brutality. When violence is defen-
sive, provoked, or cartoony, it is more acceptable (Elling, 2006).
■ Girls want everything to be happy and sweet. Not true. If you read books 
written speciﬁ cally for girls, you’ll see that they’re not just saccharine from one
end to the other. Girls like stories ﬁ lled with mystery, suspense, even danger—but 
again, it has to be meaningful, not just random or pointless.
■ Girls don’t like to be scared. This is only partially true. Jesyca Durchin makes
a useful distinction between spooky and scary. Girls like things that are spooky but 
not scary. The abandoned house or the carnival at night is spooky. Walking through 
dark streets with a murderer on the loose is scary. Spooky is about the possibility of 
being startled or frightened; scary is about the possibility of being hurt or killed.
A Final Note
Bear in mind that these are generalities. The characteristics described previously
do not appeal to all girls, but they certainly appeal to many. You should take them 
into consideration if you’re trying to make a game for girls.
Some developers, both male and female, ﬁ nd the idea of making games about hair, 
clothing, and makeup repulsive; they feel that this perpetuates a stereotype of fem-
ininity. Although there’s some merit in that argument, a vastly larger number of 
games perpetuate a much more unfortunate stereotype of masculinity: They depict 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

628 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
men (and reward players) who are violent, greedy, wanton, and monomaniacal. To 
condemn games for girls on the basis that they’re stereotypical is to establish an 
unfair double standard.
Accessibility Issues
Although it took them a while to get around to it, Microsoft now leads the world in 
making their operating system and ofﬁ ce products available to people with disabili-
ties of various kinds. The game industry, regrettably, remains far behind. Its origins 
in arcade and twitch gaming have produced an unquestioned assumption that 
games are only for people with excellent eyesight and good hand-eye coordination. 
But many people who don’t possess these abilities also would like to play games, 
and you should consider ways to make your game more accessible to them.
Physical impairments fall into three general categories: visual, auditory, and mobility.
Vision-Impaired Players
Vision impairments fall into several subcategories that require slightly different 
adjustments. In any case, you should provide audio cues to go with visual cues. 
Very few events in a video game should be silent ones. When a player selects a unit, 
have the unit acknowledge its selection with a sound. When the player gives an 
order, presses a button, or chooses a menu item, be sure to indicate it with an audi-
ble cue. These cues can be quite subtle; there’s no need to ring loud bells, but make 
sure the player hears something, even if only a little tick sound.
PLAYERS WITH LOW VISION
You can help some players with cataracts and similar conditions by giving them 
brighter, more high-contrast images. Most likely, these players will already have 
turned up the brightness and contrast on their monitors, but your game can fur-
ther augment this by letting players adjust the contrast in your game, assuming 
that you have a display engine powerful enough to support this feature. Also, make 
the textures in your game available for modiﬁ cation. Vision-impaired players can 
then edit your textures to meet their own needs.
Be sure to include enough contrast in your user interface elements as well as your 
game world. Don’t try to be cool by using black-on-black or gray-on-gray menus or 
indicators.
Increasing brightness or contrast alone is not enough to help people with certain 
low vision conditions such as macular degeneration. If you really want to make a 
game that vision-impaired players can see well, you will need to do further research.
Institutions such as The LightHouse and the Wilmer Eye Institute at Johns Hopkins 
University (both in the USA) may be able to direct you to additional resources.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGNING TO APPEAL TO PARTICULAR GROUPS 
629
APPENDIX
PLAYERS WHO NEED MAGNIFICATION
Many vision-impaired players simply need everything to be a bit larger. Older play-
ers provide a good example; after about age 45, most people need reading 
glasses—but even reading glasses aren’t much help with tiny type. Tiny type is a 
bad idea in any case, especially if players have to read it under time pressure.
You can meet the needs of these people in three ways. First, if possible, allow play-
ers to change the font size of text that appears in your game, the way web browsers 
do. Second, support multiple monitor resolutions in your game. Let players who 
really need to see things in larger scale set their monitors to 640 × 480. If you have 
a complicated user interface, this may be rather tricky, but if it is, perhaps you 
should revisit the design of your interface and see if you can do without some of 
those screen elements. If you have a broad interface, consider making it deeper.
Finally, you can provide a magnifying glass feature that the player can move 
around over the screen to magnify different areas. The device probably won’t be 
usable in action scenarios, but at least it’s trivial to implement. Strange Adventures in 
Inﬁ nite Space includes a magnifying glass and switchable menu sizes, both of which 
are very helpful.
COLORBLIND PLAYERS
Color blindness is a sex-linked genetic disorder primarily affecting men. Total color 
blindness is quite rare, but one milder form (deuteranomaly) affects about 6 percent 
of the male population. Persons with this disorder have reduced sensitivity to dif-
ferent shades of green; they appear more like yellow. (So-called red–green color 
blindness is actually a misnomer for several related conditions.)
This issue matters most in user interface design. If you create identical objects dis-
tinguishable only by their color, and you use similar shades of yellow and green, 
you risk confusing the colorblind player. Vehicles or characters in a strategy game 
whose appearance is identical except for their color would be an example. Also be 
careful with indicators, such as colored lights, that turn yellow or green. Colorblind 
drivers can tell the difference between yellow and green trafﬁ c lights because the 
yellow and green lights are separate lights, so even if the driver can’t see a differ-
ence, he can tell whether the signal is yellow or green by its position (the middle 
light is always the yellow light). You can adopt this convention too: make more 
than one light, with the yellow light in a predictable location. If you don’t have 
room and have to make do with a single light, use colors other than yellow and 
green, such as black and white or black and green.
You can test the appearance of your artwork to players with different forms of color 
blindness at the Vischeck web site, www.vischeck.com.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

630 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Hearing-Impaired Players
To help support hearing-impaired players, consider the following: 
■ Display visible cues for audible events. If a car scrapes along a railing, show 
sparks; when a gun ﬁ res, show a muzzle ﬂ ash. Naturally, you can’t do this in some 
circumstances. In horror games, scary sounds often come from unseen sources, and 
that aspect is critical to creating the desired emotional effect. But for games that 
aren’t in the horror genre—which means most of them—you should be able to 
design for hearing-impaired players by including visual cues for the most critical 
audible events.
■ Offer two separate volume controls, one for music and one for sound effects. 
Be sure the player can mute either one entirely. Hearing-impaired people often 
complain that they cannot ﬁ lter out background sounds from foreground ones, so 
conversation becomes impossible in noisy environments. In a video game, music 
can prevent them from hearing important sound effects. If you can, separate spo-
ken dialog into a third category and let the players control its volume level, too. 
Make these controls easily accessible from a pause menu—don’t require the player 
to save the game and return to a shell menu to adjust them.
■ Use the rumble (vibration) feature of the controller if the controller includes 
one. If you do this, players will be able to feel events even if they cannot hear 
them. Also allow the player to turn vibration off—not all of them like it.
■ Supply optional subtitles for dialog and sound effects. (This feature is also 
called closed captioning.) It is very inexpensive to implement and enormously help-
ful to hearing-impaired players. The biggest drawback of subtitles is that you must 
leave space for them on the screen. Half-Life 2 includes closed captioning and uses 
different colors to indicate different speakers.
For more information on accommodating hearing-impaired players, visit 
Deafgamers.com at www.deafgamers.com.
Mobility Impairments
The best thing you can do for mobility-impaired players is to reduce the time pres-
sure required to accomplish tasks. Many people with physical impairments can 
manage well enough given time, but they don’t always get the time. If it’s feasible, 
include a switch that lets the player adjust the speed of the game. There’s no such 
thing as too slow.
Keep your control set simple. Strange Attractors, one of the ﬁ nalists at the 
Independent Game Festival in 2006, uses a single button for player control. Weird 
Worlds: Return to Inﬁ nite Space uses a purely mouse-based interface. Researchers are 
also working on ways to adapt games and game controllers to what is called single-
switch operation; see “Accessibility Resources” later in this section for more details. 
Obviously not all games can make do with so few controls, but even if you’re not 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

