■ Chapter 1: Games and Video Games
■ Chapter 2: Design Components and Processes
■ Chapter 3: Game Concepts
■ Chapter 4: Game Worlds
■ Chapter 5: Creative and Expressive Play
■ Chapter 6: Character Development
■ Chapter 7: Storytelling and Narrative
■ Chapter 8: User Interfaces
■ Chapter 9: Gameplay
■ Chapter 10: Core Mechanics
■ Chapter 11: Game Balancing
■ Chapter 12: General Principles of Level Design
PART ONE
1


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Games and Video Games
Before discussing game design, we have to establish what games are and how they 
work. You might think that everybody knows what a game is, but there are so 
many kinds of games in the world that it’s best not to make assumptions based on 
personal experience alone. We’ll start by identifying the essential elements that a 
game must have, and then deﬁ ne what a game is based on those elements. Then 
we’ll go on to discuss what computers bring to gaming and how video games are 
different from conventional games. Finally, we’ll look at the speciﬁ c ways in which 
video games entertain people and note some other enjoyable features of video 
games that you must learn how to design.
What Is a Game?
Work consists of whatever a body is obliged to do, and . . . Play consists of whatever a 
body is not obliged to do.
—MARK TWAIN, THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER
Games arise from the human desire for play and from our capacity to pretend. Play
is a wide category of nonessential, and usually recreational, human activities that 
are often socially signiﬁ cant as well. Pretending is the mental ability to establish a 
notional reality that the pretender knows is different from the real world and that 
the pretender can create, abandon, or change at will. Playing and pretending are 
essential elements of playing games. Both have been studied extensively as cultural 
and psychological phenomena.
Toys, Puzzles, and Games 
In English, we use the word play to describe how we entertain ourselves with toys, 
puzzles, and games—although with puzzles, we more frequently say that we solve
them. However, even though we use the same word, we do not engage in play with 
all types of entertainment in the same way. What differentiates these types of play 
is the presence, or absence, of rules and goals.
Rules are instructions that dictate how to play. A toy does not come with any rules 
about the right way to play with it, nor does it come with a particular goal that you 
as a player should try to achieve. You may play with a ball or a stick any way you 
like. In fact, you may pretend that it is something else entirely. Toys that model 
other objects (such as a baby doll that resembles a real baby) might suggest an 
CHAPTER 1
2


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMES AND VIDEO GAMES 
3
 CHAPTER 1
appropriate way to play, but the suggestion is not a rule. In fact, young children
get special enjoyment by playing with toys in a way that subverts their intended 
purpose, such as treating a doll as a car.
If you add a distinct goal to playing—a particular objective that you are trying to 
achieve—then the article being played with is not a toy but a puzzle. Puzzles have 
one rule that deﬁ nes the goal, but they seldom have rules that dictate how you 
must get to the goal. Some approaches might be fruitless, but none are actually 
prohibited.
A game includes both rules and a goal. Playing a game requires pretending and it is 
a more structured activity than playing with toys or puzzles. As such, it requires 
more maturity. As children develop longer attention spans, they start to play with 
puzzles and then to play games. Multiplayer games also require social cooperation, 
another thing that children learn to do as they mature.
The Deﬁ nition of a Game
Deﬁ ning any term that refers to a broad class of human behaviors is a tricky business,
because if anyone can ﬁ nd a single counterexample, the deﬁ nition is inaccurate. 
Efforts to ﬁ nd unassailable deﬁ nitions of such terms usually produce results so gen-
eral as to be useless for practical purposes. The alternative is to acknowledge that a 
deﬁ nition is not rigorous but serves as a convenient description to cover the major-
ity of cases. In this book, we’ll use the following nonrigorous deﬁ nition of a game:
GAME A game is a type of play activity, conducted in the context of a pretended reality, 
in which the participant(s) try to achieve at least one arbitrary, nontrivial goal by 
acting in accordance with rules.
There may be exceptions—activities that someone would instantly recognize as a 
game but that don’t conform to this deﬁ nition. So be it. The deﬁ nition is intended 
to be practical rather than complete.
OTHER VIEWS
Many people in ﬁ elds as diverse as anthropology, philosophy, history, and of course, 
game design have attempted to deﬁ ne the word game over the years. In Rules of Play,
Salen and Zimmerman examine several of these deﬁ nitions (Salen and Zimmerman, 2003, 
pp. 73–80). Most, but not all, make some reference to rules, goals, play, and pretending. 
Some include other elements such as decision-making or the quality of being a system. 
This book doesn’t try to refute or rebut any of these; it just presents a new deﬁ nition to stand 
beside the others. Note that some commentators, such as Raph Koster in A Theory of Fun for 
Game Design, disparage the distinctions between toys, puzzles, and games as irrelevant 
(Koster, 2004, p. 36). However, it is important to address them in an introductory text.
NOTE The essential 
elements of a game are 
rules, goals, play, and 
pretending. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

4
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
The Essential Elements of a Game
The essential elements of a game are play, pretending, a goal, and rules. The deﬁ ni-
tion refers to each of these elements and includes some additional conditions as 
well. In the next few sections, we’ll look at each of these elements and their signiﬁ -
cance in the deﬁ nition more closely.
PLAY
Play is a participatory form of entertainment, whereas books, ﬁ lms, and theater are 
presentational forms. When you read a book, the author entertains you; when you 
play, you entertain yourself. A book doesn’t change, no matter how often you read 
it, but when you play, you make choices that affect the course of events.
Theoreticians of literature and drama often argue that reading or watching is a con-
scious, active process and that the audience is an active participant in those forms 
of entertainment. The theoreticians have a point, but the issue here is with the actual
content and not the interpretation of the content. With the rare exception of some 
experimental works, the audience does not actually create or change the content of 
a book or a play, even if their comprehension or interpretation does change over 
time. Reading a book or watching a play is not passive, but it is not interactive in the 
sense of modifying the text.
In contrast, each time you play a game, you can make different choices and have a 
different experience. Play ultimately includes the freedom to act and the freedom 
to choose how you act. This freedom is not unlimited, however. Your choices are 
constrained by the rules, and this requires you to be clever, imaginative, or skillful 
in your play.
This book will continue to use the term play despite the fact that you can play 
games for a serious purpose such as learning or research.
PRETENDING
David: Is this a game, or is it real?
Joshua: What’s the difference?
—EXCHANGE BETWEEN A BOY AND HIS COMPUTER FROM THE MOVIE WARGAMES
Pretending is the act of creating a notional reality in the mind, which is one
element of our deﬁ nition of a game. Another name for the reality created by
pretending is the magic circle. This is an idea that Dutch historian Johan Huizinga 
originally identiﬁ ed in his book Homo Ludens (Huizinga, 1971) and expanded
upon at some length in later theories of play. The magic circle is related to the
concept of imaginary worlds in ﬁ ction and drama, and Huizinga also felt that it 
was connected to ceremonial, spiritual, legal, and other activities. For our purposes, 
NOTE Games are in-
teractive. They require 
active players whose 
participation changes 
the course of events. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMES AND VIDEO GAMES 
5
 CHAPTER 1
however, the magic circle simply refers to the boundary that divides ideas and 
activities that are meaningful in the game from those that are meaningful in
the real world. In other words, it deﬁ nes the boundary between reality and 
make-believe.
THE MAGIC CIRCLE
Huizinga did not use the term magic circle as a generic name for the concept. His text 
actually refers to the play-ground, or a physical space for play, of which he considers the 
tennis court, the court of law, the stage, the magic circle (a sacred outdoor space for wor-
ship in “primitive” religions), the temple, and many others to be examples. However, 
theoreticians of play have since adopted the term magic circle to refer to the mental uni-
verse established when a player pretends. That is the sense that this book uses.
Players can even pretend things in the magic circle that are impossible in the real 
world (for example, “Let’s pretend that I’m moving at the speed of light.”). Figure 1.1
illustrates the magic circle.
The deﬁ nition of a game used the term pretended reality rather than magic circle
because the former is self-explanatory and the latter is not. However, from now
on, we’ll refer to the magic circle because it is the more widely accepted term.
In single-player games, the player establishes the magic circle simply by choosing to 
play. In multiplayer games, players agree upon a convention, which in turn establishes 
the magic circle. In other words, they all pretend together, and more important, they 
all agree to pretend the same things; that is, to accept the same rules. Although the 
pretended reality can seem very real to a deeply immersed player, it is still only a 
convention and can be renounced by the player refusing to play.
At ﬁ rst glance, you might not think much pretending is involved in a physical 
game like soccer. After all, the players aren’t pretending to be someone else, and 
their actions are real-world actions. Even so, the players assign artiﬁ cial signiﬁ cance 
to the situations and events in the game, and this is an act of pretending. Figure 1.2
illustrates the idea. In the real world, kicking a ball into a net is meaningless, but 
FIGURE 1.1
The magic circle, sepa-
rating the real world 
from the pretended 
reality 
NOTE Within the 
magic circle, the play-
ers agree to attach a 
temporary, artiﬁ cial 
signiﬁ cance to situa-
tions and events in the 
game. The magic circle 
comes into existence 
when the players join 
the game—in effect, 
when they agree to 
abide by the rules. It 
disappears again when 
they abandon the game 
or the game ends. 
GAME CONCEPTS, 
SITUATIONS, AND 
EVENTS
REAL WORLD 
CONCEPTS, 
SITUATIONS, 
AND EVENTS
THE MAGIC CIRCLE
THE REAL WORLD


--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
for the duration of a soccer game, the players (and spectators) pretend that kicking 
the ball into the net is a good thing to do and that it beneﬁ ts the team that success-
fully achieves it. Accepting and abiding by the rules is part of the pretending we do 
when we play a game.
The distinction between the real world and the pretended reality is not always 
clear. If the events in the game are also meaningful in the real world, the magic
circle becomes blurred. For example, various Mesoamerican Indian peoples used to 
participate in the ball-court game, a public activity that was superﬁ cially similar to 
basketball. From carvings that depict the game, it appears that the losers may have 
been ritually sacriﬁ ced to the gods. If so, the game was literally a matter of life and 
death—a matter of great importance in the real world. In spite of this, the ball-court
game was not just a raw struggle for survival; it was played according to rules.
Gambling, too, blurs the magic circle because when you gamble, you bet real 
money on the outcome of a game. The process of gambling may or may not be an 
intrinsic part of the game itself. On the one hand, you can choose to play domi-
noes for money, but you can also play for matchsticks, or nothing at all. On the 
other hand, betting money in craps is an intrinsic part of the game; if you don’t 
place a bet, you’re not participating.
A GOAL
A game must have a goal (or object; these terms are used interchangeably through-
out the book), and it can have more than one. As observed previously, goalless play 
is not the same as game play. Even creative, noncompetitive play still has a goal: 
creation. Others take this requirement for a goal even further. For example, in Rules 
of Play, Salen and Zimmerman (Salen and Zimmerman, 2003, p. 80) require that a 
game have a “quantiﬁ able outcome.” This deﬁ nition is too restrictive. Consider an 
activity in which the participants collaborate to make a drawing of a scene in a lim-
ited time, with each one holding a crayon of a different color. This activity is clearly
a game—it includes rules, a goal, play, and pretending, and the results vary depend-
ing on the decisions of the players—but its outcome is not quantiﬁ able. Similarly, 
the object of SimCity is to build and manage a city without going bankrupt, and as 
long as the player does not go bankrupt, the game continues indeﬁ nitely without 
any outcome. In fact, the object of a game need not even be achievable, so long as 
SCORING A GOAL
THE MAGIC CIRCLE
KICKING A 
BALL INTO 
THE NET
THE REAL WORLD
FIGURE 1.2
We pretend that real-
world events have 
special meanings 
inside the magic circle. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMES AND VIDEO GAMES 
7
 CHAPTER 1
the players try to achieve it. Most early arcade games, such as Space Invaders and 
Breakout, gave the players an unachievable goal.
The goal of the game is deﬁ ned by the rules and is arbitrary because the game 
designers can deﬁ ne it any way they like. The goal of the children’s card game Go 
Fish is to obtain books—collections of four cards of the same suit—but the deﬁ ni-
tion of what is to be collected could be changed by changing the rules. A book has 
no intrinsic real-world importance; it’s just a particular collection of cards. But 
within the context of a game of Go Fish, a book has a symbolic importance because 
the rules state that assembling it is a goal on the way to victory. The goal must be 
nontrivial because a game must include some element of challenge. Even in a game 
of pure chance such as craps or roulette, the players must learn to understand the 
odds and place bets that will most likely beneﬁ t them. Similarly, in a creative game, 
creation itself challenges the players. To do well requires skill. If the object can be 
achieved in a single moment, without either physical or mental effort, then the 
activity is not really a game. For example, children sometimes do a rudimentary 
form of gambling called Odds and Evens. Each ﬂ ips a coin of identical value. If the 
results are odd (don’t match), one child takes both coins; if they are even (do 
match), the other does. The odds are exactly 50 percent and there is no way to 
improve them; in fact, there is no decision-making at all. This does not qualify as
a game under the deﬁ nition because it does not include a challenge. The object is 
trivial and the process momentary. It is a form of betting, but not a game.
The rules of a game frequently characterize the game’s goal as a victory condition—
an unambiguous situation within the game at which point one or more of the 
players are declared the winners. For example, the victory condition for chess states 
that the ﬁ rst player to checkmate his opponent’s king (an unambiguous situation) 
is the winner. In timed sports such as basketball, the victory condition states that 
when time runs out (the unambiguous situation), whichever team has the most 
points wins the game and the other team loses. Game designers can also establish 
additional rules about ties and tie-breaking mechanisms if they think it is impor-
tant to have a clear winner.
The rule that determines when the game is over is called the termination condition.
In two-player games, the termination condition is usually taken for granted: The 
game ends when one player achieves victory. Note that the victory condition does 
not necessarily end the game, however. In a game with more than two players, play 
can continue to determine who comes in second, third, and so on. A foot race 
(which is a game according to the deﬁ nition) does not end when the ﬁ rst runner 
crosses the ﬁ nish line; it continues until the last runner does.
A strange game. The only winning move is not to play.
—JOSHUA, IN THE MOVIE WARGAMES
Not all games include a victory condition. Some establish only a loss condition, a sit-
uation that indicates the end of the game by specifying which player has lost. Such 
a game can never be won, only abandoned. The RollerCoaster Tycoon game is a good 
NOTE There must be 
some challenge (non-
trivial effort) involved 
in trying to achieve a 
game’s goal. The dif-
ﬁ culty of a challenge 
is perceived differently 
by different players, 
however. 
NOTE The concepts 
of winning and losing 
are not essential to 
games, but they make 
a game more exciting. 
A game must have a 
goal, but the goal need 
not be characterized as 
victory or defeat. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
example: You can lose the game by running out of money and having your theme 
park collapse, but you cannot win it.
The rules and the goal of a game are entirely contained within the magic circle,
but the concept of winning and losing transcends it to affect the real world as
well. Winning is perceived as a meritorious achievement, and after the game is 
over, players take pride in having won. Winning can also earn real-world beneﬁ ts 
such as material rewards. But you don’t have to include the ideas of victory and 
defeat in a game. They’re optional elements that make the game more exciting
and meaningful to the players.
THE RULES
Rules are deﬁ nitions and instructions that the players agree to accept for the dura-
tion of the game. Every game has rules, even if these rules are unwritten or taken 
for granted.
Rules serve several functions. They establish the object of the game and the mean-
ings of the different activities and events that take place within the magic circle. 
They also create a contextual framework that enables the players to know which 
activities are permitted and to evaluate which course of action will best help them 
achieve their goal. Among the things that the rules deﬁ ne are the following:
■ The semiotics of the game are the meanings and relationships of the various 
symbols that the game employs. Some symbols, such as innings and outs in base-
ball, are purely abstract. Others, such as armies in Risk, have a parallel in the real 
world that helps us to understand them. This book won’t go into the theory of 
game semiotics in detail. It is a complex issue and the subject of ongoing research, 
but it is beyond the scope of an introductory work.
■ The gameplay consists of the challenges and actions the game offers the player.
■ The sequence of play is the progression of activities that make up the game.
■ The goal(s) of the game is also known as the objective of the game and is 
deﬁ ned by the rules.
■ The termination condition, as described in the previous section, is the condi-
tion that ends the game (if it has one).
■ Metarules are rules about the rules. These might indicate under what circum-
stances the rules can change or when exceptions to them are allowed.
As a designer, the main thing that you need to know is that rules are deﬁ nitions 
and instructions that have meaning within the magic circle and that you are free 
to invent abstract symbols and concepts as necessary to create a game. You must, 
however, make them comprehensible to the players!
The only permanent rule in Calvinball is that you can’t play it the same way twice!
—CALVIN, IN CALVIN AND HOBBES BY BILL WATTERSON


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMES AND VIDEO GAMES 
9
 CHAPTER 1
The rules need not be especially orderly; they are, after all, arbitrary. However, they 
should be unambiguous to avoid arguments over interpretation, and they should 
be coherent with no conﬂ icts among them. If it is possible for conﬂ icts to arise, the 
rules should include a metarule for determining which rule prevails. Ambiguous or 
conﬂ icting rules are a sign of bad game design.
Things That a Game Is Not
Note that the deﬁ nition of a game does not mention competition or conﬂ ict. Formal 
game theory (a branch of mathematics) requires that there be a conﬂ ict of interest 
among the players: that is, that one or more of them is trying to oppose the activi-
ties of one or more of the others as they try to achieve their goal while preventing 
the others from achieving theirs. For example, Rules of Play (Salen and Zimmerman, 
2003, p. 80) describes a game as an “artiﬁ cial conﬂ ict.” Although this concept is 
essential to game theory, it’s too restrictive a deﬁ nition for our purposes because
it excludes creative games and purely cooperative games. The “Competition and 
Cooperation” section later in this chapter addresses those issues; for now, be aware 
that games require achievement but not necessarily the opposition of forces.
As a game designer, you should take a broad view of games. Think of a game as an 
activity rather than as a system of rules, as some theorists do. Although all games 
require rules, rules alone do not make a game. For a game to exist, it must be played;
otherwise it is simply a theoretical abstraction. If you think of a game as an activ-
ity, it focuses your attention on the player—the person for whom the game is 
made—rather than on the rules.
Note also that the deﬁ nition does not refer to entertainment or recreation. People 
most often play games for entertainment, but they sometimes play games for study, 
practice, or training in a serious subject. In this context, the deﬁ nition of play 
becomes a bit vague because your boss can require that you “play” a game as part 
of your “work” (and if you’re being paid to design games, you certainly should).
In any case, clearly people don’t play games only for entertainment.
Finally, the deﬁ nition doesn’t say anything about fun. Good games are fun and bad 
games are not, generally speaking, but fun is an emotional response to playing a 
game, not intrinsic to the game itself. Just because a game is not fun doesn’t mean 
that it’s not a game. In any case, as you will see later in this chapter, fun is too nar-
row a concept to encompass all that games can do for the player.
Gameplay
Many have tried to deﬁ ne what gameplay is over the years. Game designer Sid 
Meier’s famous deﬁ nition in Game Architecture and Design is “a series of interesting 
choices” (Rollings and Morris, 2003, p. 61). Another designer, Dino Dini, deﬁ nes it 
as “interaction that entertains” (Dini, 2004, p. 31). Although neither of these is 
obviously wrong, these deﬁ nitions are too general for practical use and not much 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
help as you learn how to design a game. Again, this book uses a nonrigorous deﬁ ni-
tion that might not cover all possible cases but that provides a basis for thinking 
about game design. The deﬁ nition hinges on challenges and actions, so we look at 
them ﬁ rst.
CHALLENGES
A challenge is any task set for the player that is nontrivial to accomplish. Overcoming
a challenge must require either mental or physical effort. Challenges can be as sim-
ple as getting a ball through a hoop or as complex as making a business proﬁ table. 
Challenges can be unique, recurring, or continuing. In action video games, players 
frequently face a recurring challenge to defeat a number of identical enemies, and 
then having done so, they must overcome a unique challenge to defeat a particular 
boss enemy. In a combat ﬂ ight simulator, shooting down enemy planes is a recur-
ring challenge, whereas avoiding being hit by them is a continuing challenge. The 
players must do both at once to be successful.
You can also deﬁ ne a challenge in terms of other, smaller challenges. For example, 
you can give your player an overall challenge of completing an obstacle course, and 
you can set up the obstacle course in terms of smaller challenges such as climbing 
over a fence, crawling under a barrier, jumping across a gap, and so on. The largest 
challenge of all in a game is to achieve its goal, but unless the game is extremely 
simple (such as tic-tac-toe), the players always have to surmount other challenges 
along the way.
Most challenges in a game are direct obstacles to achieving the goal, although 
games might include optional challenges as well. You can include optional chal-
lenges to help the player practice or simply to provide more things for the player to 
do. In sports games, a team needs only to score more goals than its opponent(s) to 
win the game, but the team may consider an optional challenge to prevent the 
opposing team from ever scoring at all.
The challenges in a game are established by the rules, although the rules don’t 
always specify them precisely. In some cases, the players must ﬁ gure out what the 
challenges are by thinking logically about the rules or by playing the game a few 
times. For example, the rules of Othello (Reversi) state only how pieces are con-
verted from one color to another and that the object of the game is to have the 
most pieces of your own color when the board is ﬁ lled. As you play the game, how-
ever, you discover that the corner spaces on the board are extremely valuable 
because they can never be converted to your opponent’s color. Gaining control of
a corner space is one of the major challenges of the game, but it’s not spelled out 
explicitly in the rules.
A challenge must be nontrivial, but that doesn’t mean that it must be difﬁ cult. 
Young children and inexperienced players often prefer to play games with easy 
challenges.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMES AND VIDEO GAMES 
11
 CHAPTER 1
ACTIONS
The rules specify what actions the players may take to overcome the challenges and 
achieve the goal of the game. The rules deﬁ ne not only what actions are allowed 
but also which ones are prohibited and which ones are required and under what 
circumstances. Games also permit optional actions that are not required to sur-
mount a challenge but add to the player’s enjoyment in other ways. For example,
in the Grand Theft Auto games, you can listen to the radio in the car.
Many conventional games allow any action that is not prohibited by the rules. For 
example, in paintball, you may run, jump, crouch, crawl, climb, or make any other 
movement that you can think of to take enemy ground. Because video games are 
implemented by computer software, however, they can allow only actions that are 
built into the game. A video game offers a player a ﬁ xed suite of actions to choose 
from, which limits the number of ways in which a player can attack a challenge.
THE DEFINITION OF GAMEPLAY
Combining the concepts of challenges and actions produces the following deﬁ nition:
GAMEPLAY Gameplay consists of:
■  The challenges that a player must face to arrive at the object of the game.
■  The actions that the player is permitted to take to address those challenges.
This deﬁ nition lies at the heart of game design. Gameplay consists of challenges 
and actions, and you will see this idea continually throughout the rest of the book. 
As a designer, you must create them both together. It’s not enough to invent inter-
esting challenges without the actions that will surmount them, nor is it enough to 
think of exciting actions without the challenges that they are intended to address. 
Games do sometimes permit additional actions that are not intended to solve a 
challenge, but the essence of gameplay is the challenge/action relationship.
Fantasy and imagination play an important role in entertaining the player, and 
some designers consider them to be elements of gameplay; in other words, the act 
of pretending that you are a pilot or a princess is an explicit part of the gameplay. 
However, these elements unnecessarily complicate the deﬁ nition of gameplay. A 
challenge might imply a fantasy role (if you’re trying to ﬂ y a plane, you must be a 
pilot), but you should deﬁ ne the player’s fantasy independently of the gameplay for 
reasons that the next chapter explains.
Fairness
Generally speaking, players expect that the rules will guarantee that the game is 
fair. Different societies, and indeed individual players, have varying notions of 
what is and is not fair. Fairness is not an essential element of a game but a cultur-
ally constructed notion that lies outside the magic circle. It is, in fact, a social 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

12 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
metarule that the players can use to pass judgment on the rules themselves. Players 
sometimes spontaneously decide to change the rules of a game during play if they 
perceive that the rules are unfair or that the rules are permitting unfair behavior. 
For all the players to enjoy a game, they must all be in general agreement about 
what constitutes fair play.
CHANGING THE RULES
Whether the rules can be changed during play is usually determined by an often-unwritten 
social convention, but in some cases, the rules themselves describe the procedure for 
changing the rules. Games in which rules can be changed usually deﬁ ne two types of 
rules: the mutable (changeable) and the immutable. The immutable rules include instruc-
tions about when and how the mutable rules may be changed. Nomic, created by 
philosopher Peter Suber, is such a game.
It is particularly important that the players perceive a video game to be fair because,
unlike conventional games, video games seldom give the players any way to change 
the rules if the players don’t like them. One widely accepted deﬁ nition of fairness is 
that all the players in a multiplayer game must have an equal chance of winning at 
the beginning of the game. The simplest way to achieve this is to make the game 
symmetric, as you’ll see in the next section. In single-player video games, fairness 
is a complex issue that has to do with balance and with meeting players’ expecta-
tions. Chapter 11, “Game Balancing,” discusses this at much greater length. 
Symmetry and Asymmetry
In a symmetric game, all the players play by the same rules and try to achieve the 
same victory condition. Basketball is a symmetric game. The initial conditions, the 
actions allowed, and the victory condition are identical for both teams. Many tradi-
tional games such as chess and backgammon are symmetric in every respect except 
for the fact that one player must move ﬁ rst.
WHO GOES FIRST?
In turn-based games, the fact that one player moves ﬁ rst can confer an advantage to one 
side or the other. For example, in tic-tac-toe among experienced players, only the person 
who goes ﬁ rst can win. However, if a game is designed in such a way that the advantage 
of going ﬁ rst is slight or nonexistent, this asymmetry can be ignored. In chess, only the 
weakest pieces on the board, pawns or knights, can move on the ﬁ rst turn, and they
cannot move very far or establish a dominant position. The asymmetry of going ﬁ rst is 
considered irrelevant, so for practical purposes chess is a symmetric game.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMES AND VIDEO GAMES 
13
 CHAPTER 1
People usually feel that if all players start in the same state, they all have an equal 
chance of winning. This assumes that the deﬁ nition of fairness ignores the differ-
ences in the players’ skill levels. Occasionally, people agree that a highly skilled 
player must take a handicap—that is, they impose a disadvantage on a skilled player 
to give the less-skilled players a better chance of winning. Amateur golf is the best-
known example: Poor players are allotted a certain number of strokes per match 
that do not count against their score. On the other hand, professional golf, in 
which prize money is at stake, does not use this system and is purely symmetric.
In an asymmetric game, different players may play by different rules and try to 
achieve different victory conditions. Many games that represent real-world situa-
tions (for example, war games based on historical events) are asymmetric. If you 
play a war game about World War II, one side is the Axis and one is the Allied
powers. The two sides necessarily begin at different locations on the map, with
different numbers of troops and different kinds of weapons. As a result, it is often 
necessary for the two sides to have different objectives to make the game fair.
In asymmetric games, it is much more difﬁ cult to determine in advance whether 
players of equal skill have an equal chance of winning. As a result, people often 
adjust the rules of asymmetric games to suit their own notions of fairness. Figure 1.3
shows an asymmetric medieval board game called Fox and Geese. One player 
moves the fox (F) and the other moves the geese (G). 
The players take turns each moving one piece. The objective for the fox is to jump 
over the geese and remove them from the board, while the objective for the geese is 
to push the fox into a corner so that it cannot move. The geese cannot jump over 
the fox. Several variants of this game exist because people have adjusted the rules 
to align it closer to their sense of fairness. Some versions have two foxes; other ver-
sions have smaller numbers of geese; in some, the geese may not move on the 
diagonal lines, and so on.
FIGURE 1.3
Fox and Geese: an 
asymmetric medieval 
board game 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

14 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Competition and Cooperation
Competition occurs when players have conﬂ icting interests; that is, when the
players try to accomplish mutually exclusive goals. Cooperation occurs when the 
players try to achieve the same or related goals by working together. Players who 
are trying to achieve different, unrelated goals that are not mutually exclusive are 
neither competing nor cooperating—they are not really playing the same game. 
Competition modes are ways to build cooperation and competition into games:
■ Two-player competitive (“you versus me”) is the best-known mode; this is 
found in the most ancient games such as chess and backgammon.
■ Multiplayer competitive (“everyone for himself”) is familiar from games such 
as Monopoly, poker, and of course, many individual sports such as track and ﬁ eld 
athletics. This is also known as deathmatch, although the term is usually only used 
in shooter games.
■ Multiplayer cooperative (“all of us together”) occurs when all the players 
cooperate to accomplish the same goal. Conventional cooperative games are some-
what rare, but they are more common in video games. Many games, such as LEGO
Star Wars, offer a two-player cooperative mode as a variant of their normal single-
player mode. Gauntlet was a wonderful four-player cooperative arcade video game. 
■ Team-based (“us versus them”) mode occurs when the members of a team 
cooperate, and the team collectively competes against one or more other teams. 
This mode is familiar to fans of soccer and many other team sports as well as part-
ner games such as bridge.
■ Single-player (“me versus the situation”) is familiar to those who play solitaire 
card games as well as the vast majority of arcade and other video games such as the 
Mario series from Nintendo.
■ Hybrid competition modes occur in a few games such as Diplomacy. Such 
games speciﬁ cally permit cooperation at times, even if the overall context of the 
game is competitive. In Diplomacy, players may coordinate their strategies, but they 
also may renege on their agreements to their own advantage if they wish. Monopoly,
by contrast, does not permit cooperation because it gives the cooperating players 
too much of an advantage against the others.
Many video games let the players choose a competition mode at the beginning of 
the game: single-player, team-based, or multiplayer competitive. A choice of compe-
tition modes broadens the market for these games but adds considerably to the 
work of designing them. In several cases, the designers clearly found one mode 
more interesting than another, adding the others as an afterthought. For example, 
Dungeon Keeper was a brilliant single-player game but was not well designed for 
multiplayer play.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMES AND VIDEO GAMES 
15
 CHAPTER 1
Conventional Games Versus Video Games
A game designer should be able to design all kinds of games, not just video games. 
A game designer must have a thorough understanding of the essential elements—
play, rules, goals, and so on—and should be able to design an enjoyable game with 
nothing but paper and pencil. That’s part of the reason the beginning of this chap-
ter included so much material on games in general. However, the purpose of this 
book is to teach you to design video games, and from now on it concentrates on 
that (although it will still sometimes refer to conventional games such as Monopoly
when they illustrate a point particularly well). If you’d like to learn more about
general game design, read Rules of Play by Salen and Zimmerman (Salen and 
Zimmerman, 2003).
You now know the formal deﬁ nition of a game, but from this point on, we’ll use 
the word game in an informal sense to refer to the game software. Phrases like “the 
game is smart” or “the game offers the player certain options” mean the software, 
not the play activity itself. 
Video games are a subset of the universe of all games. A video game is a game medi-
ated by a computer, whether the computer is installed in a tiny keychain device 
such as a Tamagotchi or in a huge electronic play environment at a theme park. 
The computer enables video games to borrow entertainment techniques from other 
media such as books, ﬁ lm, karaoke, and so on. This section looks at what the com-
puter brings to gaming.
Hiding the Rules
Unlike conventional games, video games do not require written rules. The game 
still has rules, but the machine implements and enforces them for the players. The 
players do not need to even know exactly what the rules are, although they do 
need to be told how to play. In most video games, the computer sets the boundary 
of the magic circle because player actions are meaningful in the game only if the 
machine can detect them with its input devices. The computer also determines 
when the player reaches the goal. It adjudicates victory and defeat if those concepts 
are programmed into the game.
This means players no longer have to think about the game as a game. A player
contemplating an action can simply try it, without having to read the rules to see 
whether the game permits it. This lets players become much more deeply immersed 
in the game, to see it not as a temporary artiﬁ cial environment with arbitrary rules, 
but as an alternate universe of which the player is a part.
Hiding the rules has one big disadvantage. If the players don’t know the rules, they 
don’t know how to optimize their choices. They can learn the rules only by playing 
the game. This is a reasonable design technique provided that the game includes 
hints about how to play it and what to expect. However, some video games force 
NOTE The most 
important beneﬁ t com-
puters bring to gaming 
is that the computer 
relieves the players of 
the burden of person-
ally implementing the 
rules. This frees the 
players to become as 
deeply immersed in a 
video game as they can 
in other forms of enter-
tainment. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
the player to learn by trial and error, which can make the game extremely frustrat-
ing. Many people deeply dislike having to learn by trial and error, and requiring a 
player to do so limits the market for that game to those players who are able to tol-
erate the frustration.
DESIGN RULE Avoid Trial and Error
Provide adequate clues that enable players to deduce the correct resolution to a problem. 
Avoid creating challenges that they can surmount only by trial and error. (Challenges that 
require physical skill and that may be overcome with practice are an exception.)
Setting the Pace
In conventional games that don’t use a timer, either the players or an independent 
referee sets the pace of the game—the rate at which the events required by the rules 
take place. In effect, it is up to the players to make the game go. In video games, the 
computer sets the pace and makes the game go. Unless speciﬁ cally waiting for the 
player’s input, the computer keeps the game moving forward at whatever pace the 
designer has set. This allows us to design fast and furious games that constantly 
throw enemies or other challenges at the players, or to design slow and deliberative 
games in which the players can stop to think for as long as they want. Games can 
also modulate the pace, giving players a rest between periods of intense activity.
Presenting a Game World
Because a game world is ﬁ ctional—a fantasy world—the game designer can include 
imaginary people, places, and situations. The players can think of themselves as 
make-believe characters in a make-believe place. With conventional games, this 
takes place primarily in the player’s imagination, although printed boards, cards, 
and so on can help. 
Video games can go much further. By using a screen and speakers, video games 
present a ﬁ ctional world the players can sense directly. Until recently, the poor
state of computer graphics meant that the players had to use a lot of imagination, 
and of course, text-based computer games still intentionally rely on the players’ 
imaginations. However, it has always been a goal of game developers to present 
game worlds that seem as real as the ﬁ ctional worlds in television or ﬁ lm. Although 
we still have a great deal of work to do, this goal is in sight. Modern video games 
are full of pictures, animation, movies, music, dialog, sound effects, and so on that 
conventional games cannot possibly provide. In fact, video games have become so 
photorealistic in recent years that some designers now experiment with a wider 
range of visual styles such as Impressionism, traditional Japanese brush painting, 
and so on.
NOTE Video games 
can present a designer’s 
ﬁ ctional game worlds 
to the player more 
directly than board 
games can, just as 
ﬁ lms can present a ﬁ lm 
director’s imaginary 
worlds more directly 
than books can. This 
principle enables video 
games to entertain 
players in a wider 
variety of ways than 
conventional games do. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMES AND VIDEO GAMES 
17
 CHAPTER 1
At the fringes of the video game industry, some people are also making games of 
augmented reality, or mixed reality, in which computers are used in conjunction with 
real-world activities to play a game. Such games often use cellular telephones, video 
cameras, or global positioning systems as well as web servers and a browser-based 
interface for some of the players. This book doesn’t discuss how to design such 
games, but use the resources in the references if you’re interested in learning more.
Creating Artiﬁ cial Intelligence
In 1959, IBM scientist Arthur Samuels devised a program that played checkers 
(Samuels, 1959). The program could also learn from its mistakes, and eventually it 
became good enough to beat expert human players. Much of the earliest research 
on artiﬁ cial intelligence and games was of this sort as computer scientists tried to 
create artiﬁ cial opponents that could play traditional games as competently as 
humans could. Artiﬁ cial intelligence (AI) lets us play multiplayer games even when 
we don’t have other people to play with.
However, AI brings considerably more to video gaming than artiﬁ cial opponents 
for traditional games. Game developers use AI techniques for the following:
■ Strategy. This means determining the optimal action to take by considering the 
possible consequences of a variety of available actions. Samuels’s checker-playing 
program did this, but checkers is a game of perfect information, which means there 
is no hidden information and no element of chance. Modern video games usually 
have both hidden information and a large element of chance, so a strategy is more 
difﬁ cult to compute.
■ Pathﬁ nding. This means ﬁ nding the most advantageous routes through a simu-
lated landscape ﬁ lled with obstacles.
■ Natural language parsing. Despite decades of research, computers still cannot 
understand ordinary written or spoken language well, but researchers are still very 
interested in using it for games. When this problem is solved, players will be able to 
give commands using natural sentences.
■ Natural language generation. Video games currently produce language by 
playing combinations of previously recorded phrases or sentences. At the moment, 
they cannot generate language on their own. In time perhaps they will, which will 
make simulated people seem far more realistic. In the meantime, games use AI to 
select a sentence from their library of prerecorded material that is most appropriate 
for the current game situation.
■ Pattern recognition. This valuable technique has numerous applications 
including voice recognition, face recognition, pattern detection in ongoing pro-
cesses, and pattern detection in player behavior. Human poker players use pattern 
recognition to establish a correlation between their opponent’s behavior and their 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

18 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
opponent’s cards, which players can use to their advantage later. Eventually, a com-
puter might be programmed to do the same thing.
■ Simulated people and creatures. Many games use simple AI techniques to cre-
ate a behavioral model for simulated people or creatures. The simulated character 
seems to respond intelligently to the human player’s actions, at least within certain 
limits. The models are seldom complex, and a player can usually tell the difference 
between a simulated person and a real one within a few minutes. Simulating 
human beings is the most difﬁ cult and also the most important problem in game 
AI research.
Most current video games do not, in fact, contain much real AI. The point of video 
games is to entertain, not to simulate intelligence in depth, so they usually contain 
just enough AI to make the player feel as if the software is reasonably smart. The 
players—who are already immersed in the make-believe world anyway—are often 
happy to give the game credit for intelligence that it doesn’t really possess. However,
we can’t afford to rely on this. Sometimes the AI fails, and the game breaks the 
players’ immersion by doing something startlingly unintelligent; we need to
continue to improve our AI so this doesn’t happen. The future looks promising. 
Technological advances in both hardware and software are allowing designers to 
create increasingly sophisticated artiﬁ cial opponents and simulated characters. 
Artiﬁ cial intelligence is one of the most important areas of research in game 
development.
How Video Games Entertain
At its most elementary level, game design consists of inventing and documenting 
the elements of a game. However, games don’t exist in a vacuum; people create 
them to serve a purpose. That purpose might be training or study, but most often 
games are meant to entertain. You cannot become a successful game designer sim-
ply by creating games in the abstract. To make games for entertainment, you must 
learn to be an entertainer. This section looks at how games entertain people.
Different people enjoy different things, so we have both grand opera and motorcy-
cle races as well as long, slow adventure games and short, frenetic arcade games. As 
a well-rounded game designer, you should be able to create games that entertain in 
a variety of ways.
DESIGN RULE You Can’t Please Everyone
It is not possible to design an ideal game that pleases everyone, because everyone does 
not enjoy the same thing. Do not try.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMES AND VIDEO GAMES 
19
 CHAPTER 1
Gameplay
Games provide gameplay, that is, challenges and actions that entertain. People 
enjoy a challenge, as long as they have a reasonable expectation of being able to 
accomplish it. People will also try a challenge that they have almost no expectation 
of meeting if the risk is low and the reward is high. Challenge creates tension and 
drama. At the simplest level, presenting players with a challenge amounts to asking 
the question, “Can you do it?” They’ll enjoy trying to prove that they can.
People also enjoy executing the actions that the game offers. It’s fun to ﬂ y a plane, 
shoot a riﬂ e, design clothing, build a castle, or sing and dance. Video games let us 
do many things that are impossible or too expensive to do in real life, which is an 
important part of their appeal. The actions don’t all have to be tied to a speciﬁ c 
challenge; some things are fun to do even if they don’t affect the outcome of the 
game. Many children’s video games include toy-like elements to play with that 
ring, light up, change color, and so on.
DESIGN RULE Gameplay Comes First
Gameplay is the primary source of entertainment in all video games. When designing a 
game, it is the ﬁ rst thing to consider.
Table 1.1 lists several types of challenges that video games offer, along with classic 
examples from individual games or game series.
CHALLENGE T YPE
CLASSIC EXAMPLE
Physical Coordination Challenges
Speed and reaction time
Tetris
Accuracy or precision (steering, shooting) 
Need for Speed
Timing and rhythm
Dance Dance Revolution
Learning combination moves
Street Fighter II
Formal Logic Challenges
Deduction and decoding
Minesweeper
Pattern Recognition Challenges
Static patterns
Brain Age
Patterns of movement and change
Sonic the Hedgehog, behavior patterns
of enemies
TABLE 1.1 
Video Game Challenges


--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
CHALLENGE T YPE
CLASSIC EXAMPLE
Time Pressure
Beating the clock
Frogger
Achieving something before someone else 
IndyCar Racing 
Memory and Knowledge Challenges
Trivia
You Don’t Know Jack
Recollection of objects or patterns
Brain Age
Exploration Challenges
Identifying spatial relationships
Descent, navigating in three dimensions
Finding keys (unlocking any space)
Ultima
Finding hidden passages
Doom
Mazes and illogical spaces
Zork
Conﬂ ict
Strategy, tactics, and logistics
Warcraft, commanding armies
Survival
Pac-Man, avoiding being caught
Reduction of enemy forces
Space Invaders, killing aliens
Defending vulnerable items or units
Ico, looking after a little girl who can’t ﬁ ght
Stealth
Thief: The Dark Project, avoiding being seen
Economic Challenges
Accumulating resources or points (growth)
Civilization
Establishing efﬁ cient production systems
The Settlers 
Achieving balance or stability in a system
SimEarth
Caring for living things
The Sims
Conceptual Reasoning Challenges
Sifting clues from red herrings
Law and Order, solving crimes
Detecting hidden meanings
Planescape: Torment, understanding char-
acters’ motivations from vague hints
Understanding social relationships
Façade, reconciling a quarreling couple
Lateral thinking
The Incredible Machine, building a machine 
from limited parts
Creation/Construction Challenges
Aesthetic success (beauty or elegance)
The Sims, assembling a photo album
Construction with a functional goal
SimCity
TABLE 1.1  continued
Video Game Challenges


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMES AND VIDEO GAMES 
21
 CHAPTER 1
Aesthetics
Video games are an art form, so aesthetics are a part of their design. This doesn’t 
mean a game has to be beautiful, any more than a ﬁ lm or a painting has to be 
beautiful. Rather, it must be designed with a sense of style and created with artistic 
skill. A game with clumsy animation, a muddy soundtrack, trite dialog, or sloppy 
artwork will disappoint players even if its gameplay is good.
Aesthetic considerations go beyond the game world, though. The interface graph-
ics—buttons, numbers, type fonts, and so on—must complement the game world 
to create a consistent experience. Even the way the game responds to the player’s 
button presses can be judged aesthetically. Animations should move smoothly and 
naturally; a slow, jerky, or unpredictable response feels awkward. The physics of 
moving objects should look natural—or at least credible. Speed, accuracy, and grace 
are all part of a game’s aesthetic appeal.
DESIGN RULE Aesthetics Are Important Too
An ugly or awkward video game is a bad one, no matter how innovative its design or 
impressive its technology. Part of your job is to give your players aesthetic pleasure.
Harmony
Good games and game worlds possess harmony, which is the feeling that all parts of 
the game belong to a single, coherent whole. This quality was ﬁ rst identiﬁ ed by game
designer Brian Moriarty. In his lecture, “Listen: The Potential of Shared Hallucinations,
(Moriarty, 1997) Moriarty explained the concept of harmony as follows:
Harmony isn’t something you can fake. You don’t need anyone to tell you if it’s there or 
not. Nobody can sell it to you, it’s not an intellectual exercise. It’s a sensual, intuitive 
experience. It’s something you feel. How do you achieve that feeling that everything 
works together? Where do you get this harmony stuff?
Well, I’m here to tell you that it doesn’t come from design committees. It doesn’t come 
from focus groups or market surveys. It doesn’t come from cool technology or expensive 
marketing. And it never happens by accident or by luck. Games with harmony emerge 
from a fundamental note of clear intention. From design decisions based on an ineffable
sense of proportion and rightness. Its presence produces an emotional resonance with its 
audience. A sense of inner unity that has nothing to do with what or how you did 
something, it has something to do with why. Myst and Gemstone both have harmony. 
They have it because their makers had a vision of the experience they were trying to 
achieve and the conﬁ dence to attain it. They laid down a solid, ambient groove that 
players and their respective markets can relate to emotionally. They resisted the urge to 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
overbuild. They didn’t pile on a lot of gratuitous features just so they could boast about 
them. And they resisted the temptation to employ inappropriate emotional effects. 
Effects like shock violence, bad language, inside humor.
You know, the suspension of disbelief is fragile. It’s hard to achieve it and hard to maintain.
One bit of unnecessary gore, one hip colloquialism, one reference to anything outside 
the imaginary world you’ve created is enough to destroy that world. These cheap effects 
are the most common indicators of a lack of vision or conﬁ dence. People who put this 
stuff into their games are not working hard enough.
Harmony is an essential quality of a game’s aesthetic appeal. With every design 
decision you make, you should ask yourself whether the result is in harmony with 
your overall vision. Too many games have elements that seem bolted on, last-min-
ute ideas that somebody thought would be cool to include. Although every game 
design requires compromises, an important part of your job as a designer is to min-
imize the false notes or off-key elements that compromises tend to create.
DESIGN RULE Strive for Harmony
A good game is a harmonious game. Try to ﬁ nd a way to make every aspect of your game 
ﬁ t together into a coherent, integrated whole.
Storytelling
Many games incorporate some kind of story as part of the entertainment. In con-
ventional games, players can ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to become immersed in a story because 
the players must also implement the rules. Stopping to implement the rules inter-
rupts the players’ sense of being in another place or being actors in a plot. Video 
games can mix storylike entertainment and gamelike entertainment almost seam-
lessly. To some extent, they can make players feel as if they are inside a story, affecting
its ﬂ ow of events. This has enormous implications for game design and is one of the 
reasons that video games are more than simply a new kind of game; they are a 
completely new medium. Many video games—even those that involve the most fre-
netic action—now include elements of storytelling. Chapter 7, “Storytelling and 
Narrative,” will discuss this concept in detail.
In fact, storytelling is so powerful as an entertainment device that one genre of 
video game—the adventure game—is starting to move away from the formal con-
cept of a game entirely. Although we still call them games, adventure games are in 
fact a new hybrid form of interactive entertainment—the interactive story. Chapter 
19, “Adventure Games,” discusses this and other aspects of adventure games in 
more detail. As time goes on, we can expect to see more new kinds of game/story/
play experiences emerge that defy conventional descriptions. Video games aren’t 
just games any more.
NOTE Storytelling 
enables video games to 
entertain the player in 
ways that conventional 
games cannot and 
permits the creation 
of a new, hybrid form 
of entertainment: the 
interactive story. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMES AND VIDEO GAMES 
23
 CHAPTER 1
Risks and Rewards
Risks and rewards as sources of entertainment are most familiar to us from gam-
bling. You risk money by placing a bet, and you are rewarded with more money if 
you win the bet. However, risk and reward are key parts of any kind of competitive 
gameplay, even if no money is at stake. Whenever you play a competitive game, 
you risk losing in the hope that you will get the reward of winning. Risk and 
reward also occur on a smaller scale within the game. In a war game, when you 
choose a place to begin an attack, you risk the attack’s being detected and repulsed, 
but if you are successful, you are rewarded by controlling new territory or depleting 
the enemy’s resources. In Monopoly, you risk money by purchasing a property in the 
hope that you will be rewarded with income from rents later on.
Risk is produced by uncertainty. If a player knows exactly what the consequences 
of an action will be, then there is no risk. In gambling, the uncertainty is often 
produced by chance (which way will the dice fall?), but other features produce 
uncertainty as well. A game might have hidden information (where are the enemy’s 
troops hiding?) revealed only after you take the risk. Even in a game such as chess, 
which has no hidden information and no element of chance, not knowing what 
your opponent will do produces uncertainty.
The risk/reward mechanism makes gameplay more exciting. Gameplay is entertain-
ing all by itself because it lets the player attempt the challenges and perform the 
actions, but adding risks and rewards raises the level of tension and makes success 
or failure more meaningful.
A game should always reward achievement, whether it was risky or not. The more 
difﬁ cult the achievement, the bigger the reward should be. Rewards can take vari-
ous forms. Usually they advance the player’s interests somehow, either by giving 
him something tangible that helps him play (such as money or a key to a locked 
area) or something intangible but still valuable, such as a strategic advantage. 
However, rewards don’t have to affect the gameplay. Games that include a story 
reward the player’s achievements by advancing the plot of the story by presenting
a little more of it, often in a noninteractive video sequence. Games for children 
often reward achievements with ﬂ ashing lights and ringing sounds.
Players’ attitudes toward risk-taking vary. Some take an aggressive, inherently risky 
approach, whereas others prefer a defensive approach in which they try to mini-
mize risk. You can design your game to suit one style or the other or try to balance 
the game so that neither really has an advantage.
DESIGN RULE Risks Need Rewards
A risk must always be accompanied by a reward. Otherwise the player has no incentive to 
take the risk.
NOTE Playing a game 
is intrinsically enter-
taining, but adding 
risks and rewards to 
a game makes it more 
exciting. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

24
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Novelty
People enjoy novelty: new things to see, to hear, and to do. Early video games were 
extremely repetitive and developed an unfortunate reputation for being monoto-
nous. Nowadays, however, video games can offer more variety and content than 
any traditional game, no matter how complex. Not only can video games give the 
player new worlds to play in, but they can easily change the gameplay as the game 
progresses. So, for example, Battleﬁ eld 1942 not only lets the player play as a foot 
soldier (one of several types, in fact), but also allows him to hop in a tank, an air-
plane, or a ship and play from those perspectives.
Novelty can even be an end in itself. In the WarioWare series from Nintendo, the 
player must play dozens of strange microgames, each of which lasts only a few sec-
onds. Their constantly changing goals and graphical styles make WarioWare quite 
challenging, if rather disorienting. There aren’t many games like this on the market, 
however. Novelty alone is not enough to sustain player interest. Most games rely 
more on theme-and-variations approaches—introducing a new element and giving 
the player the chance to explore it for a while before introducing the next one.
Learning
Learning doesn’t mean “edutainment” or educational software here. Learning is an 
aspect of playing a game, even just for entertainment, and people enjoy the learn-
ing process. This is the central thesis of Raph Koster’s book, A Theory of Fun for 
Game Design (Koster, 2004). Although some of the things Koster says conﬂ ict with 
ideas in this book, A Theory of Fun for Game Design is well worth reading. In the 
case of conventional games, the players have to learn the rules and then learn how 
to optimize their chances of winning. In video games, the players don’t have a 
guide to the rules, so they have to learn how the game works by playing it. If you’re 
playing a classic arcade game, over time you learn the movement and attack pat-
terns of your enemies and ﬁ gure out when they’re vulnerable to a counterattack. 
Then you come across a new enemy and have to learn a new pattern. So long as a 
game keeps offering you new things to learn, it remains enjoyable—assuming it 
was enjoyable to begin with! After you have learned everything about a game and 
have complete mastery over it, you might start to think that the game is boring. 
Koster asserts that this is inevitable, which is why people eventually abandon a 
game and pick up a new one. (This is more true of single-player games than it is of 
multiplayer games, because in multiplayer games the unpredictability of human 
opponents keeps them fresh.)
Learning isn’t always easy, and it isn’t guaranteed to be fun, as we all remember 
from our days in school. People enjoy learning when at least one of two conditions 
is met: (1) it takes place in an enjoyable context, and (2) it provides useful mastery. 
A game should always provide an enjoyable context for learning; if it doesn’t, 
there’s something wrong with the game. A game should also offer useful mastery; 
the things that players learn should help them play the game more successfully. For 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMES AND VIDEO GAMES 
25
 CHAPTER 1
further discussion of this issue, consider reading James Paul Gee’s books, What 
Video Games Have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy (Gee, 2004) and Why Video 
Games Are Good for Your Soul (Gee, 2005).
Creative and Expressive Play
People love to design and create things, whether clothing, creatures, buildings,
cities, or planets. They also love to customize a basic template of some kind to 
reﬂ ect their own choices. This activity can directly inﬂ uence the gameplay (a 
player chooses a model of car to drive in a racing game) or can be purely cosmetic 
(a player chooses a color for the car). If a personal choice affects the gameplay, play-
ers won’t always select the option the designer might consider the best option, even 
if they’re told which one it is. They often choose one that they like regardless of the 
consequences. That’s how strong the appeal of self-expression is.
As video game machines become more powerful and games begin to reach a wider 
audience, creative and self-expressive play become increasingly important. Research 
shows that girls and women are often more motivated by a desire to express them-
selves through play than by a desire to defeat others in competition. Chapter 5, 
“Creative and Expressive Play,” is entirely devoted to the design issues of creative 
and expressive play.
Immersion
…it was agreed, that my endeavours should be directed to persons and characters 
supernatural, or at least romantic, yet so as to transfer from our inward nature a human 
interest and a semblance of truth sufﬁ cient to procure for these shadows of imagination 
that willing suspension of disbelief for the moment, which constitutes poetic faith.
—SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE, BIOGRAPHIA LITTERARIA, CHAPTER XIV
Coleridge was originally referring not to immersion but to an absence of skepti-
cism. He wanted people who read his poems to accept the poems’ romantic, 
imaginary people (“shadows of imagination”) on “poetic faith,” without asking 
questions. However, the term suspension of disbelief, as used by the game industry, 
has come to mean immersion: losing track of the outside world. Immersion is the 
feeling of being submerged in a form of entertainment, or rather, being unaware 
that you are experiencing an artiﬁ cial world. When you are immersed in a book, 
movie, or game, you devote all your attention to it and it seems real. You have lost 
track of the boundaries of the magic circle. The pretended reality in which you are 
immersed seems as real as, or at least as meaningful as, the real world.
This feeling of immersion is deeply and satisfyingly entertaining to some players; 
others prefer not to become immersed and to remember that it’s only a game while 
they play. People who take the game seriously ﬁ nd interruptions that break their 
sense of immersion jarring and disappointing. This is part of the reason that har-
mony is so important.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

26
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Players become immersed in games in several ways:
■ Tactical immersion is the sense of being “in the groove” in high-speed action 
games. It’s sometimes called the Tetris trance. When playing such a game, the 
action is so fast that your brain has no time for anything else. You don’t have time 
to think about strategy or a story line; the game is mostly about survival. To encourage
tactical immersion, you must offer the player dozens of small challenges that can 
each be met in a fraction of a second. These small challenges must be fairly similar 
to one another—such as in an arcade shooter. Abrupt changes in the gameplay 
destroy tactical immersion.
■ Strategic immersion occurs when you are deeply involved in trying to win a 
game, like the immersion of the chess master: observing, calculating, and plan-
ning. You don’t think about a story, characters, or the game world but focus strictly 
on optimizing your choices. To experience strategic immersion, the players must 
understand the rules of the game clearly so that they can plan actions to their max-
imum advantage. Strategic immersion breaks down if a game confronts players 
with a situation they have never seen before or if the game contains too many 
unpredictable elements. Unexpected or erratic behavior makes it impossible to plan.
■ Narrative immersion is the feeling of being inside a story, completely involved 
and accepting the world and events of the story as real. It is the same immersion as 
that produced by a good book or movie, but in video games, the player is also an 
actor within the story. Good storytelling—interesting characters, exciting plots, 
dramatic situations—produces narrative immersion. Bad storytelling—two-dimen-
sional characters, implausible plots, or trite situations—destroys narrative 
immersion, and so does gameplay that is inappropriate in the context of the story. 
If a player is immersed in a story about being a dancer, the gameplay should be 
about dancing, not about ﬂ ying a plane or commanding an army.
You cannot create immersion purely by design. The game must also be attractive 
and well constructed, or its ﬂ aws break the player’s sense of immersion. Also, you 
cannot design a game that pleases everyone, and players do not become immersed 
in a game they don’t like. If you want to create an immersive game, you ﬁ rst must 
have a clear understanding of how your player likes to be entertained, then deliver 
the best entertainment experience that you can. Chapter 3, “Game Concepts,” dis-
cusses the question of understanding your hypothetical player in more detail.
Socializing
Most conventional games are multiplayer games, so since the earliest times, gaming 
has been a social activity. People love to play video games together too, and tech-
nology gives them lots of ways to do it:
■ Multiplayer local gaming means two or more people playing together in one 
place. It’s classic home console play for more than one person. Each player has his 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMES AND VIDEO GAMES 
27
 CHAPTER 1
own controller, but they all look at the same screen. In some games the screen is 
split, and each player looks at her own part of it; in others, the players all see the 
same game world together.
■ Networked play, also called multiplayer distributed gaming, refers to people 
playing against other people over a network at distributed locations. This is the way 
people play games over the Internet. To communicate with each other, they have to 
have a voice connection or type messages as they play.
■ LAN parties are events in which a group of people all get together in one room, 
but each has his own computer hooked to the others by a local area network (LAN). 
This way they can talk to each other, but they can’t see each other’s screens.
■ Group play occurs when a group of people get together in one room to play a 
single-player game. The player using the controller at any given time is said to be in 
the “hot seat,” and the other players watch and offer advice. Players usually hand 
off the controller from one to the next as the gameplay changes, so as to have the 
person most skilled at the current challenges play during that part of the game. 
This style of play is particularly popular with children.
When designing a multiplayer game, it’s important to think about the social aspect 
of entertaining people. By offering them chat mechanisms, bulletin boards, and 
other community-building facilities, you can extend the game’s entertainment far 
beyond the gameplay alone. For more information about designing online games, 
see Chapter 21, “Online Games.”
Summary
In this chapter, you have learned that play, pretending, a goal, and rules are the 
essential elements of a game, and you’ve learned how they work together to create 
the experience of playing one. You have been taught to think of gameplay in terms 
of challenges and actions, and you have looked at such important issues as winning 
and losing, fairness, competition, and cooperation. You should now be aware of 
some of the special beneﬁ ts that computers bring to playing games and the mani-
fold ways that video games entertain people. With this as a foundation, you’re 
ready to proceed to the next chapter. There, you’ll learn how games are structured, 
an approach to designing them, and what it takes to be a game designer.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

