28
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Design Practice EXERCISES
1. Create a competitive game for two players and a ball that does not involve 
throwing it or kicking it. Prove that it is a game by showing how it contains all the 
essential elements.
2. Using a chessboard and the types of pieces and moves available in chess, devise 
a cooperative game of some kind for two people, in which they must work together 
to achieve a victory condition. (You do not need to use the starting conditions of 
chess, nor all the pieces.) Document the rules and the victory condition.
3. Deﬁ ne a competitive game with a single winner, for an unlimited number of 
players, in which only creative actions are available. Be sure to document the ter-
mination and victory conditions.
4. Describe the elements of the gameplay in each of the following games: backgam-
mon, poker, bowling, and Botticelli. (Use the Internet to look up the rules if you do 
not know them.)
5. List examples not already mentioned in this book of video games designed for 
single-player, multiplayer local, and multiplayer distributed play. Explain how the 
games’ design supports these different modes.
Design Practice QUESTIONS
1. As a potential designer, do you see yourself as an artist, an engineer, a crafts-
man, or something else? Why do you see yourself that way?
2. Do you agree or disagree with the deﬁ nition of a game? If you disagree, what 
would you add, remove, or change?
3. We have deﬁ ned gameplay strictly in terms of challenges and actions, leaving out 
the game world or the story. Do you feel that this is appropriate? Why or why not?
4. Why is it fair if one athlete trains to become better but not fair if he takes drugs 
to become better? What does this say about our notions of fairness?
5. We’ve listed only the most important things that computers bring to gaming. 
What other things can you think of?
6. The list of ways that video games entertain people is only a beginning. What 
else would you add?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 CHAPTER 2
Design Components 
and Processes
Game design is the process of
■ Imagining a game
■ Deﬁ ning the way it works
■  Describing the elements that make up the game (conceptual, functional, artistic, 
and others)
■  Transmitting information about the game to the team who will build it
A game designer’s job includes all of these tasks. This chapter begins by discussing 
an approach called player-centric game design. Then you learn about the central 
components of any video game—the core mechanics and the user interface (UI)—
and you see how these components are deﬁ ned in the design process. Finally, we 
explore the various job roles on a design team and some of the qualities that it 
takes to be a game designer.
In the video game industry, all but the smallest games are designed by teams of 
anywhere from 3 to 20 people. (The entire development team is often much larger, 
but we’re only concerned with the design team.) This book is written as if you are 
the lead designer, responsible for overseeing everything. If your team is small, or if 
you are designing alone, you may perform many of the different design roles your-
self. This text is written as if you are designing for a home console machine or a 
personal computer, although much of the material here is applicable to any game 
device.
An Approach to the Task
Over the years, people have tried many approaches to game design, and some of 
them are better than others. A few tend to result in catastrophic failures. This book 
teaches you a way to think about what you are actually trying to accomplish so 
that you’ll be more likely to succeed than fail.
29
CHAPTER 2


--- PAGE BREAK ---

30 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Art, Engineering, or Craft?
Some people like to think of game design as an art, a process of imagination that 
draws on a mysterious wellspring of creativity. They think of game designers as art-
ists, and they suppose that game designers spend their time indulging in ﬂ ights of 
imagination. Other people, often more mathematically or technologically oriented, 
see game design as a type of engineering. They concentrate on the methodology for 
determining and balancing the rules of play. Game design to these people is a set of 
techniques. Aesthetics are a minor consideration.
Each of these views is incomplete. Game design is not purely an art because it is not 
primarily a means of aesthetic expression. Nor is game design an act of pure engi-
neering. It’s not bound by rigorous standards or formal methods. The goal of a 
game is to entertain through play, and designing a game requires both creativity 
and careful planning.
Interactive entertainment is an art form, but like ﬁ lm and television, it is a collab-
orative art form. In fact, it is far more collaborative than either of those media, and 
development companies seldom grant the game designer the level of creative con-
trol that a ﬁ lm director enjoys. Consequently, no single person on a design team is 
entitled to call himself the artist. Designing games is a craft, like cinematography or 
costume design. A game includes both artistic and functional elements: It must be 
aesthetically pleasing, but it also must work well and be enjoyable to play. The 
greatest games—the ones whose reputations spread like wildﬁ re and that continue 
to be played and discussed long after their contemporaries are forgotten—combine 
their artistic and functional elements brilliantly, achieving a quality for which the 
best word is elegance. Elegance is the sign of craftsmanship of the highest order.
The Player-Centric Approach
This book teaches you an approach called player-centric game design. This approach 
helps you produce an enjoyable game, which, in turn, helps it be a commercially 
successful one. Many other factors affect the commercial success of a game as well: 
marketing, distribution, and the experience of the development team. These are 
beyond the control of the game designer, so no design or development methodol-
ogy can guarantee a hit. However, a well-designed game undoubtedly has a better 
chance of being a hit than a poorly designed one.
 PLAYER-CENTRIC GAME DESIGN is a philosophy of design in which the designer envisions
a representative player of a game the designer wants to create. The designer then 
undertakes two key obligations to that player:
■  The duty to entertain: A game’s primary function is to entertain the player, and it is 
the designer’s obligation to create a game that does so. Other motivations are secondary.
■  The duty to empathize: To design a game that entertains the player, the designer 
must imagine that he is the player and must build the game to meet the player’s desires 
and preferences for entertainment. 
NOTE Game design 
is a craft, combining 
both aesthetic and 
functional elements. 
Craftsmanship of a 
high quality produces 
elegance. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
31
 CHAPTER 2
You can adapt the ﬁ rst obligation, the duty to entertain, somewhat if you’re design-
ing the game for education, research, advertising, political, or other purposes, but 
for recreational video games it is imperative. If a player is going to spend time and 
money on your game, your ﬁ rst concern must be to see that he enjoys himself. This 
means that entertaining the player takes priority over your own desire to express 
yourself creatively. You must have a creative vision for your game, but if some 
aspect of your vision is incompatible with entertaining the player, you should mod-
ify or eliminate it.
The second obligation, the duty to empathize, requires you to place yourself in the 
position of a representative player and imagine what it is like to play your game. 
You must mentally become the player and stand in his shoes. For every design deci-
sion that you make—and there will be thousands—you must ask yourself how it 
meets the player’s desires and preferences about interactive entertainment. Note 
the mention of a representative player. It is up to you to decide what that means, but 
this hypothetical being must bear some resemblance to the customers whom you 
want to actually buy the game. Smart game designers conduct audience research if 
they’re planning to make a game for an audience that they don’t know much about.
When you employ player-centric game design, you need to think about how the 
player will react to everything in your game: its artwork, its user interface, its game-
play, and so on. But that is only the surface. At a deeper level, you must understand 
what the player wants from the entire experience you are offering—what motivates 
her to play your game at all? To design a game around the player, you must have a 
clear answer to the following questions: Who is your player, anyway? What does 
she like and dislike? Why did she buy your game? The answer is also inﬂ uenced by 
the game concept that you choose for your game. Chapter 3, “Game Concepts,” dis-
cusses both player-centric design and game concepts in more detail.
This process of empathizing with your player is one of the aspects that differenti-
ates games from presentational forms of entertainment. With books, paintings, 
music, and movies, it is considered artistically virtuous to create your work without 
worrying about how it is received, and it’s thought to be rather mercenary to mod-
ify the content based on sales considerations. But with a video game—whether you 
think of it as a work of art or not—you must think about the player’s feelings about 
the game, because the player participates in the game with both thought and action.
There are two common misconceptions about player-centric design that you 
must avoid.
MISCONCEPTION 1: I AM MY OWN TYPICAL PLAYER.
For years, designers built video games, in effect, for themselves. They assumed that 
whatever they liked, their customers would also like. Because most designers were 
young males, they took it for granted that their customer base was also made up of 
young males. That was indeed true for a long time, but now it is a dangerous fal-
lacy. As the market for games expands beyond the traditional gamer, you must be 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

32 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
able to design games for other kinds of players. In the player-centric approach, this 
means learning to think like your intended players, whoever they may be: little 
girls, old men, busy mothers, and so on. You cannot assume that players like what 
you like. Rather, you must learn to design for what they like. (You may also ﬁ nd that 
you grow to like a game that you didn’t think you would as you work to design it!)
One of the most common mistakes that male designers make is to assume that 
male and female players are alike, when in fact they often have different priorities 
and preferences. For an excellent discussion of how to reach female players without 
alienating male ones, read Gender Inclusive Game Design, by Sheri Graner Ray (Ray, 
2003). With every design decision, ask yourself, “What if the player is female?” 
Does your decision apply equally to her? 
A few game developers argue that they don’t want to work on any game that they 
personally wouldn’t want to play—that if a game doesn’t appeal to them, they 
won’t have any “passion” for it and won’t do a good job. Taken to its logical conclu-
sion, that means we would never have games for young children, because young 
children can’t build games for themselves. Insisting that you must have passion for 
your game or you can’t do a good job on it is a very self-centered approach—the 
opposite of player-centric design. Professionalism is just as important as passion. 
Professionalism is the willingness to work hard to do a good job because that’s what 
you’re paid for, regardless of whether you would choose to play your game for 
entertainment. If you are a true professional, you can create a brilliant game for an 
audience other than yourself. Kaye Elling, the former art manager at Blitz Games, 
revealed in a lecture to the Animex International Festival of Animation and 
Computer Games that the design team on the game Bratz: Rock Angelz—a game 
intended for 10-year-old girls—consisted entirely of adult men. The game was a
big success in spite of this, because the designers learned how to think like their 
intended players. They talked to girls and women, studied other products that girls 
like, and took seriously their duty to empathize (Elling, 2006).
DESIGN RULE You Are Not Your Player
Do not assume that you epitomize your typical player. Player-centric game design requires 
you to imagine what it is like to be your player, even if that person is someone very differ-
ent from you.
MISCONCEPTION 2: THE PLAYER IS MY OPPONENT.
Because arcade (coin-op) games have been around a long time, some of the techniques 
of arcade game design have crept into other genres where they are not appropriate. 
Arcade games make money by getting the player to put in more coins. Consequently, 
they are designed to be hard to play for more than a few minutes and to continu-
ally threaten the player with losing the game. This places considerable constraints 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
33
 CHAPTER 2
on the designer’s freedom to tell a story or to modulate the difﬁ culty of the game-
play. The famous Japanese designer Shigeru Miyamoto, who invented the arcade 
game Donkey Kong (and with it the entire Mario franchise), eventually abandoned 
arcade game design because he found it too limiting.
The arcade model encourages the game designer to think of the player as an oppo-
nent. It suggests that the designer’s job is to create obstacles for the player, to make 
it hard for the player to win the game. This is a profoundly wrongheaded approach 
to game design. It does not take into account the player’s interests or motivations 
for playing. It tends to equate “hard” with “fun.” And it ignores the potential of 
creative games, which may not include obstacles at all. Game design is about much 
more than creating challenges.
If you are working on multiplayer competitive games, in which the players provide 
the challenge for each other, you’re less likely to make this mistake. But it’s an easy 
trap to fall into when you’re designing single-player games because it’s up to you to 
provide the challenges. Never lose sight of the fact that your design goal is to enter-
tain the player by a variety of means, not simply to oppose her forward progress 
through the game. 
Your duty to empathize with the player also includes an obligation not to be 
unduly arbitrary or capricious toward her. You can build in random factors that 
may make the game harder (like being dealt a bad hand of cards), and that’s all 
right if players understand that they might have better luck next time. But doing 
things like causing a player to lose a long game entirely at random, without any 
way to avoid it, is bad design. It shows a lack of empathy. 
DESIGN RULE The Player Is Not Your Opponent
Do not think of the player as your opponent. Game design is about entertaining the player, 
not opposing the player. There are many ways to entertain a player.
Other Motivations That Inﬂ uence Design
In the commercial game industry, video games are always built for entertainment, 
but even so, several factors can inﬂ uence the way a game is designed. This section 
examines some of them.
When a company chooses to build a game speciﬁ cally for a particular market and 
to include certain elements in its design speciﬁ cally to increase sales within that 
market, that game is said to be market-driven. You might think that any game made 
for sale should be market-driven. Experience shows, however, that most market-
driven games aren’t very good. You can’t make a brilliant game simply by throwing 
in all the most popular kinds of gameplay. If you try, you get a game that doesn’t 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

34 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
feel as if it’s about anything in particular. The best games are expressions of the 
designer’s vision, which makes them stand out from other games.
The opposite of a market-driven game is a designer-driven game. In designer-driven 
games, the designer retains all creative control and takes a personal role in every 
creative decision, no matter how small. Usually he does this because he’s convinced 
that his own creative instincts are superior to anyone else’s. This approach ignores 
the beneﬁ ts of play-testing or other people’s collective wisdom, and the result is 
usually a botched game. Daikatana is an often-cited example.
Many publishers commission games to exploit a license: a particular intellectual 
property such as a book (The Lord of the Rings), movie (Die Hard), or sports trade-
mark (NHL Hockey). These can be enormously lucrative. As a designer, you work 
creatively with characters and a world that already exists, and you make a contribution
to the canon of materials about that world. One downside of designing licensed 
games is that you don’t have as much creative freedom as you do designing a game 
entirely from your own imagination. The owners of the license insist on the right 
to approve your game before it ships, as well as the right to demand that you change
things they don’t like. In addition, there is always a risk of complacency. A great 
license alone is not enough to guarantee success. The game must be just as good as 
if it didn’t have a license.
A technology-driven game is designed to show off a particular technological achieve-
ment, most often something to do with graphics or a piece of hardware. For example,
in addition to entertaining the player, Crytek’s game Crysis is intended to show off 
Crytek’s 3D graphics engine and encourage other developers to use it. Console 
manufacturers often write technology-driven games when they release a new plat-
form to show everyone the features of their machine. The main risk in designing a 
technology-driven game is that you’ll spend too much time concentrating on the 
technology and not enough on making sure your game is really enjoyable. As with 
a hot license, a hot technology alone is not enough to guarantee success.
Art-driven games are comparatively rare. An art-driven game exists to show off 
someone’s artwork and aesthetic sensibilities. Although such games are visually 
innovative, they’re seldom very good because the designer has spent more time 
thinking about ways to present his material than about the player’s experience of 
the game. A game must have enjoyable gameplay as well as great visuals. Myst is a 
game that got this right; it is an art-driven game with strong gameplay.
Integrating for Entertainment
When one particular motivation drives the development of a game, the result is 
often a substandard product. A good designer seeks not to maximize one character-
istic at the expense of others but to integrate them all in support of a higher goal: 
entertaining the player.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
35
 CHAPTER 2
■ A game must present an imaginative, coherent experience, so the designer must 
have a vision.
■ A game must sell well, so the designer must consider the audience’s preferences.
■ A game with a license must pay back the license’s cost, so the designer must 
understand what beneﬁ ts this license brings and exploit them to the game’s best 
advantage.
■ A game must offer an intelligent challenge and a smooth, seamless experience, 
so the designer must understand the technology.
■ A game must be attractive, so the designer must think about its aesthetic style.
Player-centric game design means testing every element and every feature against 
the standard: Does this contribute to the player’s enjoyment? Does it entertain her? 
If so, it stays; if not, you should consider eliminating it. There’s no easy formula for 
deciding this; the main thing is to make the effort. As Brian Moriarty said in the 
section quoted in Chapter 1, “Games and Video Games,” too many designers “pile 
on gratuitous features just so that they can boast about them,” which means 
they’re not designing player-centrically.
There are sometimes reasons for including features that don’t directly entertain: 
They might be necessary to make other parts of the game work, or they might be 
required by the licensor. But you should regard them with great suspicion and do 
your best to minimize their impact on the player.
The Key Components of Video Games
Chapter 1 looked at what a game is and what gameplay is. But where does gameplay 
come from, and how does the player interact with it? In order to create gameplay 
and offer it to the player, you need to make sure your video game is composed of 
two key components. These are not technical components but conceptual ones. 
They are the core mechanics and the user interface. Some games also use a third 
important component called the storytelling engine, but we will deal with it in 
Chapter 7, “Storytelling and Narrative.” This section introduces the core mechanics 
and the user interface and shows how they work together to produce entertain-
ment. Each of these components has a complete chapter devoted to it later in the 
book, so the discussion here is limited to deﬁ ning their functions, not explaining 
how to design them.
Core Mechanics
One of a game designer’s tasks is to turn the general rules of the game into a sym-
bolic and mathematical model that can be implemented algorithmically. This 
model is called the core mechanics of the game. The model is more speciﬁ c than the 
rules. For example, the general rules might say, “Caterpillars move faster than 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

36 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
snails,” but the core mechanics state exactly how fast each moves in centimeters 
per minute. The programmers then turn the core mechanics into algorithms and 
write the software that implements the algorithms. This book doesn’t address tech-
nical design or programming but concentrates on the ﬁ rst part of the process, 
creating the core mechanics. Chapter 10, “Core Mechanics,” addresses this process 
at length. 
The core mechanics are at the heart of any game because they generate the game-
play. They deﬁ ne the challenges that the game can offer and the actions that the 
player can take to meet those challenges. The core mechanics also determine the 
effect of the player’s actions upon the game world. The mechanics state the condi-
tions for achieving the goals of the game and what consequences follow from 
succeeding or failing to achieve them. In a conventional game, the players are 
aware of the core mechanics because the players must implement the rules. In a 
video game, the core mechanics are hidden from the players. The players experi-
ence them only through play. If the players play the game over and over, they 
eventually become aware of the game’s mechanistic nature and learn to optimize 
their play to beat the game.
One quality of the core mechanics is their degree of realism. A simulation, in the for-
mal sense, is a mathematical or symbolic model of a real-world situation, created 
for the purpose of studying real-world problems. If it is to have any validity, the 
simulation must represent some part of the real world as closely as possible (though 
aspects of it may need to be simpliﬁ ed). A game, on the other hand, is created for 
the purpose of entertainment. Even if it represents the real world to some degree, it 
always includes compromises to make it more playable and more fun. For example, 
a real army requires a large general staff to make sure the army has all the ammuni-
tion and supplies it needs. In a game, a single player has to manage everything, so 
to avoid overwhelming him, the designer abstracts these logistical considerations 
out of the model—that is to say, out of the core mechanics. The player simply pre-
tends that soldiers never need food or sleep, and they never run out of ammunition.
All games fall along a continuum between the abstract and the representational.
Pac-Man is a purely abstract game; it’s not a simulation of anything real. Its location 
is imaginary, and its rules are arbitrary. Grand Prix Legends is a highly representa-
tional game: It accurately simulates the extraordinary danger of driving racing cars 
before the spoiler was invented. Although no game is completely realistic, gamers 
(and game developers) often refer to this variable quality of games as their degree 
of realism. For the most part, however, this book uses the terms abstract and repre-
sentational to characterize games at opposite ends of the realism scale.
You decide what degree of realism your game will have when you decide upon its 
concept. The decision you make determines how complex the core mechanics are.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
37
 CHAPTER 2
User Interface
The concept of a user interface should be familiar to you from computer software 
generally, but in a game the user interface has a more complex role. Most computer 
programs are tools of some kind: word-processing tools, web-browsing tools, paint-
ing tools, and so on. They are designed to be as efﬁ cient as possible and to present 
the user’s work clearly. Games are different because the player’s actions are not sup-
posed to be as efﬁ cient as possible; they are obstructed by the challenges of the 
game. Most games also hide information from the player, revealing it only as the 
player advances. A game’s user interface is supposed to entertain as well as to 
facilitate.
The user interface mediates between the core mechanics of the game and the player 
(see Figure 2.1). It takes the challenges that are generated by the core mechanics 
(driving a racing car, for example) and turns them into graphics on the screen and 
sound from the speakers. It also turns the player’s button presses and movements 
on the keyboard or controller into actions within the context of the game. If it does 
this smoothly and naturally, the player comes to associate the button press with 
the action. She no longer has to think, “I must press button A to apply the brakes.” 
Instead she thinks, “Brakes!” and presses button A automatically. The user interface 
interprets the button press as the braking action and informs the core mechanics; 
the core mechanics determine the effect of the braking and send an instruction 
back to the user interface telling it to show the result. The user interface adjusts the 
animation to show the car slowing down and presents it to the player. All this hap-
pens in a fraction of a second.
Because the user interface lies between the player and the core mechanics, it is 
sometimes referred to as the presentation layer.
The user interface does more than display the outputs and receive the inputs. It 
also presents the story of the game, if there is any, and creates the sensory embodi-
ment of the game world—all the images and sounds of the world and, if the game 
machine has a vibrating controller, the vibrations of the world, too. All the artwork 
and all the audio of the game are part of its user interface, its presentation layer. 
Two essential features of the user interface of a game are its camera model and its 
interaction model, as shown in Figure 2.2.
FIGURE 2.1
The relationships 
among the core 
mechanics, the user 
interface, and the 
player
PLAYER
USER 
INTERFACE
CORE 
MECHANICS
Inputs
Actions
Outputs
Challenges


--- PAGE BREAK ---

38 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
INTERACTION MODELS
The user interface turns the player’s inputs on the hardware into actions within the 
game world. The relationship between the player’s inputs and the resulting actions 
is dictated by the game’s interaction model. The model determines how the player 
projects her will, her choices, and her commands, into the game. In particular, it 
deﬁ nes what she may and may not act upon at any given moment. Video games use 
a number of standard interaction models, including multipresence, avatar-based 
models, contestant models, and so on. In a multipresent model, for example, the 
player can act on different parts of the game world whenever she wants to, reach-
ing “into” it from the “outside.” In an avatar-based model, the player is represented 
by a character who already is inside the game world, and the player acts on the 
world through that character. Just as the visible parts of a game’s user interface 
change during play, a game can have more than one interaction model depending 
on what is happening at the time. Chapter 8, “User Interfaces,” discusses interac-
tion models at greater length.
CAMERA MODELS
If a game includes a simulated physical space, or game world, then it almost certainly
uses graphics to display that space to the player. The user interface must display the 
space from a particular angle or point of view. Designers usually imagine that a 
hypothetical camera is pointed at the virtual space, creating the image that the 
player sees. The system that controls the behavior of this imaginary camera is 
called the camera model. To deﬁ ne the camera model, think about how you want 
the player to view the game world and specify a system in your design documents 
that the programmers can implement.
Camera models come in two types, static and dynamic. Early arcade games, and 
many small games today, use a static camera model in which the camera always 
shows the virtual space from a ﬁ xed perspective. As gaming hardware has grown 
more powerful, however, game developers have begun to create dynamic camera 
models. In these models, the camera moves in response to player actions or events 
in the game world. Dynamic camera models require more effort to design and 
implement, but they make the player’s experience livelier and more cinematic.
FIGURE 2.2
Camera model and 
interaction model are 
features of the user 
interface.
NOTE This book’s 
previous edition used 
the word perspective 
to describe the virtual 
camera, but that term 
doesn’t adequately 
describe the behavior 
of the new dynamic 
cameras. This edition 
uses camera model as 
a more general term 
for the behavior of the 
game’s virtual camera. 
We’ll still use perspec-
tive to talk about the 
actual position and 
angle of the camera.
PLAYER
CORE 
MECHANICS
Inputs
Actions
Outputs
Challenges
INTERACTION 
MODEL
USER INTERFACE
GAMEPLAY
CAMERA
MODEL


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
39
 CHAPTER 2
If a game doesn’t have a virtual space (for example, if it’s a business simulation 
that’s mostly about money), the term camera model doesn’t apply, and you have
to explain the layout of your screen in your design documents in more detail.
The most commonly used camera models are ﬁ rst person and third person for pre-
senting 3D game worlds and top-down, side-scrolling, and isometric for presenting 
2D worlds. Chapter 4, “Game Worlds,” discusses the question of game world dimen-
sionality. Chapter 8 addresses the merits of the different camera models.
GAMES WITHOUT GRAPHICS
Many of the early computer games were text-based, designed to be played on a printing 
terminal attached to a mainframe computer. Text-only games still exist in the form of 
quizzes or trivia games, especially for small devices such as cell phones. Interactive ﬁ c-
tion—text-only adventure games—has long since ceased to be a commercial genre, but 
it is still popular with a small group of hobbyists. Blind players can play text-only games 
using text-to-speech synthesizers. Also, a very small number of experimental audio-only 
games are intended for the blind.
The Structure of a Video Game
You now know how the core mechanics of a game work with the user interface to 
create gameplay for the player. A game seldom presents all its challenges at one 
time, however, nor does it permit the player to take all actions at all times. Instead, 
most video games present a subset of their complete gameplay, often with a partic-
ular user interface to support it. Both the gameplay available and the user interface 
change from time to time as the player meets new challenges or views the game 
world from a different point of view. These changes sometimes occur in response to 
something the player has done, and at other times they occur automatically when 
the core mechanics have determined that they should. How and why the changes 
occur are determined by the game’s structure. The structure is made up of gameplay 
modes, a vitally important concept in game design, and shell menus. This section 
explores gameplay modes and shell menus and discusses how they interact to form 
the structure.
Gameplay Modes
If a game is to be coherent, the challenges and actions available to the player at any 
given time should be conceptually related to one another. In hand-to-hand com-
bat, for example, the player should be able to move around, wield his weapons, 
quaff a healing potion (though that may entail some risk), and perhaps run away or 
surrender. He should not be able to pull out a map or sit down to inventory his 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

40 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
assets, even if those are actions he may take at other times in the game. Likewise, a 
racecar driver should not be able to adjust the suspension of the car while driving it 
or drive the car while it’s in the shop.
In short, unless a game is very simple, not all the challenges and actions that it 
offers make sense at all times. The player only experiences a subset of all the game-
play, usually derived from the real-world activity (ﬁ ghting, driving, constructing, 
and so on) that the game is simulating at that moment. The user interface, too, 
must be designed to facilitate whatever activity is taking place. The graphics dis-
played for driving a racing car are necessarily different from those used for tuning 
it up in the shop. The camera and interaction models are different as well. When 
driving, the vehicle is the player’s avatar on the racetrack, and the player usually 
sees the world from the cockpit; when tuning up the car, the player has omnipres-
ent control over all of its parts, but the rest of the game world (the racetrack) is not 
accessible.
This combination of related items—available gameplay and supporting user
interface at a given point in the game—collectively describe something called a 
gameplay mode. See Figure 2.3 for an illustration. In a given gameplay mode, the 
features of the game combine to give the player a certain experience that feels dif-
ferent from other parts of the game; that is, other gameplay modes. Because the 
game offers only a subset of all its challenges and actions in a given gameplay 
mode, the player is focused on a limited number of goals.
The concept of the gameplay mode is central to the process of designing video 
games. Here is the formal deﬁ nition:
GAMEPLAY MODE A gameplay mode consists of the particular subset of a game’s total 
gameplay that is available at any one time in the game, plus the user interface that 
presents that subset of the gameplay to the player.
A game can be in only one gameplay mode at a time. When either the gameplay 
available to the player or the user interface (or both) changes signiﬁ cantly, the 
game has left one mode and entered another. A change to the user interface 
FIGURE 2.3
The large dashed box 
represents the game-
play mode.
PLAYER
CAMERA 
MODEL
CORE 
MECHANICS
Inputs
Actions
Outputs
Challenges
INTERACTION 
MODEL
USER INTERFACE
GAMEPLAY
GAMEPLAY MODE


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
41
 CHAPTER 2
qualiﬁ es as a change of mode because such changes redirect the player’s focus of 
attention and cause him to start thinking about different challenges. Also, if the 
mapping between the controls on the input device and the actions in the game 
changes sharply, the player probably thinks of it as a new mode.
GAMEPLAY MODES IN AMERICAN FOOTBALL
Video games about American football have many rapid and complex mode switches, 
especially when you’re playing the offensive team; that is, the team that has the ball. The 
mapping between the buttons on the controller and the actions they produce in the game 
changes on a second-by-second basis. Here is the sequence necessary to select and exe-
cute a pass play in Madden NFL:
1. Choose the offensive formation you want to use on the next play from a menu.
2. Choose the play you want to call from another menu.
3. Take control of the quarterback. Call signals at the line of scrimmage. During this 
period only one man, who is not the quarterback, may move under the player’s control. 
Snap the ball to the quarterback.
4. Drop back from the line of scrimmage and look for an open receiver. Choose one and 
press the appropriate button to pass the ball to the chosen receiver.
5. Take control of the chosen receiver and run to the place where the ball will come 
down. Press the appropriate button to try to catch the ball.
6. Run toward the goal line. At this point you may not throw the ball again.
This process requires six different gameplay modes in the space of about 45 seconds.
Many of the earliest arcade games have only one gameplay mode. In Asteroids, for 
example, you ﬂ y a spaceship around a ﬁ eld of asteroids, trying to avoid being hit by 
one and shooting at them to break them up and disintegrate them. The camera 
model and the interaction model never change, nor does the function of the con-
trols. When you have destroyed an entire screenful of asteroids, you get a new 
screenful that moves somewhat faster, but that is all. From time to time an enemy 
spaceship appears and shoots at you, presenting new challenges (to avoid being 
shot and to shoot the enemy), but because nothing else changes, it isn’t really a 
new gameplay mode. On the other hand, in Pac-Man you are chased by dangerous 
ghosts until you eat a large dot on the playﬁ eld. For a short period after that, the 
ghosts are vulnerable and they run away from you. Because this represents a signiﬁ -
cant change to the gameplay (and is a key part of the game’s strategy), it can be 
considered a new gameplay mode even though the user interface does not change. 
As the designer, it’s up to you to decide when the gameplay or the user interface has 
changed enough to be a new gameplay mode.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

42 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Figures 2.4 and 2.5 are screen shots from Empire: Total War illustrating two very 
different modes. Note that the on-screen indicators and menu items are entirely 
different in the two modes. The ﬁ rst, a turn-based campaign mode, shows an aerial 
perspective of a landscape. The player uses this mode for building cities, raising 
armies, and other strategic activities. The second, for ﬁ ghting sea battles in real 
time, shows ship-to-ship combat. You cannot manage the entire empire from sea 
battle mode; you can only ﬁ ght other ships such as the ones visible in the picture. 
The sea battle mode is essentially tactical.
Not all gameplay modes offer challenges that the player must meet immediately.
A strategy menu in a sports game is a gameplay mode because the player must 
choose the best strategy to help her win the game even though play is temporarily 
suspended while the player uses the menu. A character creation screen in a role-
playing game or an inventory management screen in an adventure game both 
qualify as gameplay modes. A player’s actions there inﬂ uence the challenges she 
faces when she returns to regular play.
FIGURE 2.4
Campaign mode in 
Empire: Total War


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
43
 CHAPTER 2
Shell Menus and Screens
Whenever the player is taking actions that inﬂ uence the game world, that is, actu-
ally playing the game, the game is in a gameplay mode. However, most games also 
have several other modes in which the player cannot affect the game world, but can 
make other changes. These modes are collectively called shell menus because the 
player usually encounters them before and after playing the game itself (they are a 
“shell” around the game, outside the magic circle). Examples of the kinds of activi-
ties available in a shell menu include loading and saving the game, setting the 
audio volume and screen resolution, and reconﬁ guring the input devices for the 
player’s convenience. A pause menu in a game is also a shell menu unless it lets
the player take some action that affects the game world (such as making strategic 
adjustments in a sports game), in which case it is a gameplay mode. Noninteractive 
sequences such as title screens or credits screens are called shell screens. 
The Game Structure
The gameplay modes and shell menus of the game, and the relationships among 
them, collectively make up the structure of the game. For example, in a car racing 
game, driving the car into the pit causes the game to switch from the driving mode 
to the pit stop mode. When the work of the pit crew is ﬁ nished, the game switches 
FIGURE 2.5
Sea battle mode in 
Empire: Total War
TIP If a player can 
take an action that 
inﬂ uences the core 
mechanics—even if
that inﬂ uence is de-
ferred—the game is
in a gameplay mode.
If he cannot, the game 
is in a shell menu or 
shell screen. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

44 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
back to the driving mode. Pressing the Start button on the controller while driving 
brings up a pause menu, and so on. You need to document these details for the rest 
of the development team.
To document the structure, you can begin by making a list of all the modes and 
menus in the game. You must also include a description of when and why the game 
switches from one mode or menu to another: what event, or menu selection, causes 
it to change. Each mode or menu description should include a list of other modes 
and menus it can switch to and, for each possible switch, a notation about what 
causes it.
You can document the relationships among all the modes and menus by simply 
listing them all in a text editor. However, the result isn’t easy to follow. A better 
approach is to document the structure of a game with a ﬂ owboard, a combination
of ﬂ owchart and storyboard. This type of diagram is described in the section 
“Flowboard,” later in this chapter. 
Normally, a game moves among its shell menus in response to player actions and 
nothing else, although arcade games often display an attract loop that repeatedly 
shows a title screen, a short noninteractive video of a game in progress, and a
high score table. During actual play, a game changes from one gameplay mode to 
another in response to player actions, or automatically as the circumstances of the 
game require. For example, in a soccer game, certain violations of the rules result in 
a penalty kick, in which a single athlete on one team tries to kick the ball past the 
opposing team’s goalie and into the goal and the other athletes on both teams play 
no role. This is clearly a gameplay mode different from normal play. The game 
enters the penalty kick mode not in response to a speciﬁ c player choice but because 
a rule has been violated.
The Stages of the Design Process
Now that you have learned about the player-centric approach to game design and 
the key components and structure of a video game, you are ready to start thinking 
about how to go about designing one. Unfortunately, there are so many kinds of 
video games in the world that it is impossible to deﬁ ne a simple step-by-step process 
that produces a single design document all ready for people to turn into content 
and code. Furthermore, unless a game is very small, it is not possible to create a 
complete design and then code it up afterward. That is how the game industry built 
games in the 1980s, but experience has shown that large games must be designed 
and constructed in an iterative process, with repeated playtesting and tuning, and 
occasional modiﬁ cations to the design, throughout development. However, not all 
parts of the design process can be revisited. Some, such as the choice of concept, 
audience, and genre, should be decided once at the beginning and should not 
change thereafter. The process is therefore divided into three major parts:
NOTE A video game 
is always in either a 
gameplay mode or a 
shell menu or screen. 
The gameplay modes 
and shell screens, 
and the relationships 
among them, collec-
tively make up the 
game structure. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
45
 CHAPTER 2
■ The concept stage, which you perform ﬁ rst and whose results do not change
■ The elaboration stage, in which you add most of the design details and reﬁ ne 
your decisions through prototyping and playtesting
■ The tuning stage, at which point no new features may be added, but you can 
make small adjustments to polish the game
This book uses the term elaboration stage rather than development stage because the 
latter runs the risk of being confused with game development. Figure 2.6 shows the 
three stages of the design process.
Each of these stages includes a number of design tasks. In the sections that follow, 
we look at each stage and the different tasks that you perform in each.
Chris Bateman and Richard Boon discuss the relative merits of various design pro-
cesses in Chapter 1 of their book 21st Century Game Design (Bateman and Boon, 
2006). Look at it for further discussion on the subject.
The Concept Stage
Client 2: Do I take it that you are proposing to slaughter our tenants?
Mr. Wiggin: Does that not ﬁ t in with your plans?
Client 1: Not really. We asked for a simple block of ﬂ ats.
Mr. Wiggin: Oh. I hadn’t fully divined your attitude towards the tenants.
You see I mainly design slaughterhouses.
—MONTY PYTHON’S FLYING CIRCUS, “THE ARCHITECT SKETCH”
In the concept stage of game design, you make decisions that you live with for the 
life of the project. This stage establishes things about the game that are so funda-
mental, changing them later would wreak havoc on the development process 
because a great deal of the work done to implement the game would have to be 
thrown away. It’s like constructing a building: You can revise the color scheme
and the lighting design while it’s still under construction, but you can’t decide that 
you really wanted an airport instead of a hotel once the foundations are poured.
FIGURE 2.6
Three stages of the 
design process
NOTE Unfortunately, 
the game industry 
has not yet adopted 
standard names for 
its design elements, 
processes, and docu-
ments. This book uses 
terms that other pro-
fessional developers 
would generally rec-
ognize, but you cannot 
expect any given 
company to use these 
terms exactly the way 
they are used here. 
If you get confused, 
please see the Glossary
at the end of the book 
for the deﬁ nitions of 
terms used in the book.
CONCEPT STAGE
ELABORATION 
STAGE
TUNING STAGE


--- PAGE BREAK ---

46 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
CONCEPT VERSUS PREPRODUCTION
Be sure that you don’t confuse the concept stage of design with the preproduction stage 
of game development. Preproduction is a process borrowed from ﬁ lmmaking. It’s a plan-
ning stage of game development during which a developer is deciding what sort of game 
to make, testing some of those ideas, and ﬁ guring out the budget, schedule, and staff 
requirements. Preproduction ends when the funding agency, usually a publisher, gives 
the game the green light to proceed to full production. By that time, the concept stage of 
design is already over and the elaboration stage has begun. In fact, quite a lot of design 
work gets done during preproduction because that’s how the team decides what the 
game will be. The concept stage of design usually requires only a few weeks; the prepro-
duction stage of development can go on for several months.
GETTING A CONCEPT
All game designs must begin with a game concept; that is, a general idea of how 
you intend to entertain someone through gameplay and, at a deeper level, why you 
believe it will be a compelling experience. Many different considerations inﬂ uence 
your plans for the game concept. Part of creating a game concept includes deciding 
what genre your game ﬁ ts into, if any. Deﬁ ning and reﬁ ning a game concept is 
described in detail in Chapter 3.
DEFINING AN AUDIENCE
Once you know what kind of experience you want to present, you have to think 
about who would enjoy that experience. In a commercial environment, publishers 
sometimes deﬁ ne their audience—a “target market”—and then think of a concept 
for a game to sell to them. In any case, the choices you make here have important 
consequences for your game because, in player-centric design, you test every design 
decision against your hypothetical representative player to be sure that the decision 
helps to entertain your target audience.
DETERMINING THE PLAYER’S ROLE
In an abstract video game, the player doesn’t get immersed in a ﬁ ctional game 
world and so doesn’t have much of a role. He is simply a player playing the game 
for its own sake. But in a representational game, the player does a lot more pretend-
ing. He pretends to believe in the game world, the avatar, and the situations the 
game puts him in. In such games, the player plays a role, and as a designer it is up 
to you to deﬁ ne what that role is. It could be an athlete, a general, a dancer, an 
explorer, a business tycoon, or any of a million other things that people fantasize 
about doing. Sometimes the roles in a game are multifaceted: In a sports game, the 
player often changes roles from an athlete on the ﬁ eld, to the coach planning strat-
egy, to the general manager hiring and trading players. You must be able to explain 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
47
 CHAPTER 2
the player’s role clearly, because the role a game offers is part of how publishers 
decide whether to fund that game, as well as how players decide whether to buy it.
FULFILLING THE DREAM
Abstract video games have arbitrary rules, so the player seldom has any pre-
conceptions about what the game will, or won’t, allow her to do. Representational 
video games, however, take place in a world that is at least somewhat familiar, and 
the player comes to the game with certain expectations and hopes. Representational
games are about fulﬁ lling dreams—dreams of achievement, of power, of creation, or 
simply of doing certain things and having certain experiences.
Once you have a game concept, a role, and an audience in mind, it’s time to begin 
thinking about how you will fulﬁ ll your player’s dream. What is the essence of
the experience that you are going to offer? What kinds of challenges does the player 
expect to face, and what kinds of actions does she expect to perform? Deciding 
what it means to fulﬁ ll the dream is the ﬁ rst step on the road to deﬁ ning the game-
play itself.
DESIGN RULE Concept Elements Are Permanent
You must not make changes to the concept elements of your game—the game concept, 
audience, player’s role, and dream that it fulﬁ lls—once you have started into the elabora-
tion stage of design.
The Elaboration Stage
Once you have made the fundamental decisions about your game in the concept 
stage, it’s time to move into the elaboration stage of design. At this point, your 
design work begins to move from the general to the speciﬁ c; from the theoretical to 
the concrete. In the elaboration stage, you normally begin working with a small 
development team to construct a prototype of the game. If you are planning to 
incorporate radically new ideas or new technology, your team may also build a test 
bed or technical demonstration to try them out. From this point on, you may take 
your design ideas and have the development team implement them in the proto-
type to see how they work in practice. Based on what you learn, you can then go 
back and reﬁ ne them.
At some point during the elaboration stage, your game (you hope!) gets the green 
light from a funding agency and proceeds to full production.
When you begin the elaboration stage, if you have a team of several people, it 
becomes possible to begin working on the design tasks in parallel. Once you all 
agree upon the fundamentals of the game, each designer can start work on a
particular area of responsibility.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

48 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
This process of iterative reﬁ nement is not an excuse to introduce major changes 
into the game late in its development, nor to tweak it endlessly without ever declar-
ing it ﬁ nished. Your goal is to build and ship a completed product.
THE DANGER OF IRRESOLUTION
The transition from the concept to the elaboration stage of design is a critical time. At 
this point, the most important decisions are “set in stone,” so to speak; the foundations 
are poured. Some designers are reluctant to make this transition; they say they’re “keep-
ing their options open.” They’re afraid that they might have made a bad decision or that 
they might have overlooked something. The consequences of this irresolution are usually 
disastrous. If the most critical details are still shifting as the game goes into full produc-
tion, the development team is never entirely sure what it’s trying to build. The designer 
keeps coming around and asking for changes that require huge revisions to the code and 
content. Production becomes slow and inefﬁ cient. It’s a sure sign of a lack of vision and 
conﬁ dence. Projects that get into this quagmire are usually cancelled rather than 
completed.
DEFINING THE PRIMARY GAMEPLAY MODE
The ﬁ rst task after you have locked down your concept is to deﬁ ne the primary 
gameplay mode of the game, the mode in which the player spends the majority of 
his time. Most games have one gameplay mode that is clearly the primary one. In a 
car racing game, it’s driving the car. Tuning the car up in the shop is a secondary 
mode. In war games, the primary gameplay mode is usually tactical—ﬁ ghting bat-
tles. War games often have a strategic mode as well, in which the player plans 
battles or chooses areas to conquer on a map, but he generally spends much less 
time doing that than he does ﬁ ghting.
At this point it’s not necessary to deﬁ ne every detail. The main things to work on 
are the components that make up the mode: the perspective in which the player 
views the game world, the interaction model in which he inﬂ uences the game 
world, the challenges the world presents to him in that mode, and the actions 
available to him to overcome those challenges. Get those decisions down on paper, 
and then you can move on to the details of exactly how this is to happen.
DESIGNING THE PROTAGONIST
If your game is to have a single main character who is the protagonist (whether or 
not the interaction model is avatar-based), it is essential that you design this char-
acter early on. You want the player to like and to identify with the protagonist, to 
care about what happens to her. If the perspective you chose for the primary game-
play mode was anything other than ﬁ rst person, the player is going to spend a lot 
of time looking at this character, so it’s important that she be fun to watch. You 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
49
 CHAPTER 2
must think about how she looks and also about how she behaves: what actions she 
is capable of, what emotions her face and body language can register, and what 
kind of language and vocabulary she uses. Chapter 6, “Character Development,” 
discusses these issues in depth.
DEFINING THE GAME WORLD
The game world is where your game takes place, and deﬁ ning it can be an enor-
mous task. If the game world is based on the real world (as in a ﬂ ight simulator, for 
example), then you can use photographs and maps of real places in order to create 
its appearance. But if it’s a fantasy or science ﬁ ction world, you have to rely on your 
imagination. And establishing the look and feel is only part of the task. There are 
many dimensions to a game world: physical, temporal, environmental, emotional, 
and ethical. All these qualities exist to serve and support the gameplay of your 
game, but they also entertain in their own right. Chapter 4 addresses these issues. 
DESIGNING THE CORE MECHANICS
Once you have a sense of the kinds of challenges and actions that you want to 
include in the primary gameplay mode, you can begin thinking about how the core 
mechanics create those challenges and implement the actions. For example, if you 
plan to challenge the player to accumulate money, you have to deﬁ ne where the 
money comes from and what the player has to do to get hold of it. If you challenge 
the player to play a sport, you must think about all the athletic characteristics—
speed, strength, acceleration, accuracy, and so on—that sport requires. If your 
challenges involve symbolic rather than numeric relationships, as in a puzzle game, 
you have to think about what those symbols are and how they are manipulated. 
Chapter 10 explains how to create this critical part of your game. 
CREATING ADDITIONAL MODES
As you decide upon your game concept, you may realize that you need more
than one gameplay mode—for example, you want to include separate strategic
and tactical modes in a war game or manage income and expenditures in a busi-
ness simulation. Or you may discover that you need additional modes while you 
are deﬁ ning the primary gameplay mode and core mechanics. Now that you’re in 
the elaboration stage, design the additional modes: their perspective, interaction 
model, and gameplay. You must also document what causes your game to move 
from mode to mode—the structure of your game, as described earlier in this chapter.
Do not create additional modes unnecessarily. Every extra mode requires more 
design work, more artwork, more programming, and more testing. It also compli-
cates your game. Each mode should add to the player’s entertainment and serve an 
important purpose that the game genuinely needs.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

50 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
DESIGNING LEVELS
Level design is the process of constructing the experience that the game offers 
directly to the player, using the components provided by the game design: the 
characters, challenges, actions, game world, core mechanics, and storyline if there 
is one. These components don’t have to be completely ﬁ nished in order for level 
design to begin, but enough must be in place for a level designer to have something 
to work with. In the early part of the elaboration stage, the level designers work to 
create a typical ﬁ rst playable level. This level should not be the ﬁ rst one that the 
player encounters because the ﬁ rst level in the game is atypical as the player is still 
learning to play the game. Rather, it’s called ﬁ rst playable because it’s the ﬁ rst one 
the level designers create.
Creating a working ﬁ rst playable level is an important milestone in the develop-
ment of a game because it means that testers can begin testing it. See Chapter 12, 
“General Principles of Level Design,” for an overview of the level design process.
WRITING THE STORY
Small video games seldom bother with a story, but large ones usually include a 
story of some kind. Stories help to keep the player interested and involved. They 
give her a reason to go on to the next level, to see what happens next. A story
may be integrated with the gameplay in a number of different ways. Your story
may occur within the levels as the player plays or it may simply be a transition 
mechanism between the levels—a reward for completing a level. The story may
be embedded, with prewritten narrative chunks, or emergent, arising out of the 
core mechanics. It may be linear and independent of the player’s actions, or it
may go in different directions based on the player’s choices. Chapter 7 addresses
all these issues in detail. However you choose to do it, you deﬁ ne the story during 
the elaboration stage, usually in close conjunction with level design.
BUILD, TEST, AND ITERATE
The great game designer Mark Cerny (Spyro the Dragon, Jak and Daxter) asserts that 
during the preproduction process of development, you should build, test, and then 
throw away no less than four different prototypes of your game. This may be 
extreme, but the underlying principle is correct. Video games must be prototyped 
before they can be built for real, and they must be tested at every step along the 
way. Each new idea must be constructed and tried out, preferably in a quick-and-
dirty fashion ﬁ rst, before it is incorporated into the completed product. Cerny also 
argues that none of the materials you create for prototyping should ever ﬁ nd their 
way into the ﬁ nal product—or at least, that you should never count on it. By hav-
ing a ﬁ rm rule to this effect, you free your programmers and artists to work quickly 
to build the test bed, secure in the knowledge that they won’t have to debug it later. 
If they’re trying to build maintainable code or ﬁ nal-quality artwork during the pre-
production stage of development, the testing process takes far longer than it 
should.
NOTE Plan to throw 
away all sound, art, 
and code created for 
a prototype. That way 
your artists, audio 
people, and program-
mers can work quickly 
without worrying about 
having to debug their 
content later. Trying 
to build production-
quality assets during 
preproduction just 
slows the process down. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
51
 CHAPTER 2
Once development shifts from preproduction to production, the team begins to 
work on material that will go out to the customer, and it has to be built with special 
care. However, you still can’t simply design something, hand your design off to the 
programmers, and forget it. Everything you design must be built, tested, and 
reﬁ ned as you go. This is why in modern game development testers are brought in 
right from the beginning of a project rather than at the end as they used to be.
GAME DEVELOPMENT/SCRUM MANAGEMENT PROCESS
In the last few years, many game development teams both large and small have begun to 
implement a project management process called Scrum. (Scrum is not an acronym; the 
term is borrowed from the sport of rugby.) The Scrum process helps a team organize and 
track its progress toward completing some body of work, usually creating a new product. 
In the Scrum process, the team creates and tests updated, working versions of their prod-
uct in short iterations called sprints. Each sprint lasts from one to four weeks. The team 
constantly examines and adjusts their progress so as to efﬁ ciently achieve both their 
interim and ﬁ nal goals. This enables them to identify and ﬁ x problems early on. In addi-
tion, the team holds a very brief meeting every day, and all problems must be 
revealed—nothing is held back. When a team is committed to the Scrum methodology, 
the managers have a clear picture of what is going on at all times, which helps to make 
sure the work is done on time.
This book is about game design, not game development, so it does not discuss project 
management or Scrum in more detail. Also, Scrum is intended more for actually building 
products, especially software, than for design. However, you should certainly learn about 
it if you aspire to become a commercial game developer. For additional information, read 
the book Agile Project Management with Scrum by Ken Schwaber (Schwaber, 2004). You’ll 
ﬁ nd many more Scrum resources on the Internet. 
For more information about the details of managing game development, see Game 
Architecture and Design by Rollings and Morris (Rollings and Morris, 2003).
The Tuning Stage
When you went from the concept stage to the elaboration stage, you locked down 
the game concept—the foundations of the game. During the elaboration stage, you 
ﬂ eshed out the concept and added new features as necessary. At some point, how-
ever, a time comes when the entire design must be locked—that is, no more features
may be added to the game—and you enter the tuning stage. This transition is 
sometimes called feature lock. There’s no good way to know exactly when this is.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

52
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
It’s usually dictated by the schedule. If it is going to take all the remaining time left 
to complete and debug the game as the design stands, then clearly you can’t add 
anything more to the design without making the project late! However, that is 
more of a reactive than a proactive approach to the issue. You should really lock
the design at the point at which you feel that it is complete and harmonious, even 
if there is time for more design work.
Once you have locked the design, you still have work to do. Design work enters the 
tuning stage, during which you can make small adjustments to the levels and core 
mechanics of the game as long as you don’t introduce any new features. This stage, 
more than any other, is what makes the difference between a merely good game 
and a truly great one. Tune and polish your game until it’s perfect. Polishing is a 
subtractive process, not an additive one. You’re not putting on new bells and whis-
tles but removing imperfections and making the game shine.
The Game Design Team Roles
A large video game is almost always designed by a team. Unlike Hollywood, in 
which guilds and unions deﬁ ne the job roles, the game industry’s job titles and 
responsibilities are not standardized from one company to another. Companies 
tend to give people titles and tasks in accordance with their abilities and, more 
important, the needs of a project. However, over the years a few roles have evolved 
whose responsibilities are largely similar regardless of what game or project they are 
part of.
■ Lead Designer. This person oversees the overall design of the game and is 
responsible for making sure that it is complete and coherent. She is the “keeper of 
the vision” at the highest and most abstract level. She also evangelizes the game to 
others both inside and outside the company and is often called upon to serve as a 
spokesperson for the project. Not all the lead designer’s work is creative. As the 
head of a team, she trades away creativity for authority, and her primary role is to 
make sure that the design work is getting done and the other team members are 
doing their jobs properly. A project has only one lead designer.
■ Game Designer. The game designer deﬁ nes and documents how the game actu-
ally works: its gameplay and its core mechanics. Game designers also conduct 
background research and assemble data that the game may need. On a large proj-
ect, these jobs may be split up among several game designers, all reporting to the 
lead designer.
■ Level Designer/World Builder. Level designers take the essential components 
of the game provided by the other designers—the user interface, core mechanics, 
and gameplay—and use those components to design and construct the individual 
levels that the player will play through in the course of a game. Level design used 
to be considered an inferior position to game designer, but modern level designers 
frequently need to be able to build 3D models and program in scripting languages. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
53
 CHAPTER 2
As a result, level design is now a specialized skill, or set of skills, and is considered 
just as important as game design. A project usually has several level designers 
reporting either to a lead level designer or to the lead designer.
■ User Interface Designer. If a project includes user interface design as a sepa-
rate role, it’s performed by one or more people responsible for designing the layout 
of the screen in the various gameplay modes of the game and deﬁ ning the function 
of the input devices. In large, complex games, this can easily be a full-time task. An 
otherwise brilliant game can be ruined by a bad user interface, so it is a good idea 
to have a specialist on board. (See Figure 2.7 for a notorious example.) Large devel-
opers are increasingly turning to usability experts from other software industries to 
help them test and reﬁ ne their interfaces.
■ Writer. Writers are responsible for creating the instructional or ﬁ ctional content 
of the game: introductory material, back story, dialog, cut-scenes (noninteractive 
narrative video clips), and so on. Writers do not, generally speaking, do technical 
writing—that is the responsibility of the game designers. Few games require a full-
time writer; the work is often subcontracted to a freelancer or done by one of the 
other designers.
Two other positions have a large amount of creative inﬂ uence on a game, although 
they do not normally report to the lead designer. Rather, they are people with whom 
a game designer can expect to have a lot of interaction over the course of a project.
■ Art Director. The art director, who may also be called the lead artist, manages 
production of all the visual assets in the game: models, textures, sprites, animations, 
FIGURE 2.7
Trespasser: Jurassic 
Park was an innovative 
game ruined by an 
awkward and buggy 
user interface.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

54 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
user interface elements, and so on. The art director also plays a major role in creat-
ing and enforcing the visual style of the game. Within the team hierarchy, the art 
director is usually at the same level as the lead designer, so it is imperative that the 
two of them have a good working relationship and similar goals for the project.
■ Audio Director. Like the art director, the audio director of a game oversees pro-
duction of all the audible assets in the game: music, ambient sounds, effects, and 
dialog or narration. Typically there is not as much of this material as there is of art-
work, so the audio director may be working on several projects at once. Audio is 
critical to creating a mood for the game, and the lead designer and audio director 
work together to establish what kinds of sounds are needed to produce it.
DESIGN RULE Don’t Design by Committee
Do not treat the design work as a democratic process in which each person’s opinion has 
equal value (“design by committee”). One person must have the authority to make ﬁ nal 
decisions, and the others must acknowledge this person’s authority.
GAME IDEA VERSUS DESIGN DECISION
Here’s a game idea: “Dragons should protect their eggs.”
Here’s a design decision: “Whenever they have eggs in their nests, female dragons do 
not move beyond visual range from the nest. If an enemy approaches within 50 meters of 
the nest, the dragon abandons any other activity and returns to the nest to defend the 
eggs. She does not leave the nest until no enemy has been within the 50-meter radius 
for at least 30 seconds. She defends the eggs to her death.”
See the difference? This is what creating design documents is about.
The Game Design Documents
As part of their job, game designers produce a series of documents to tell others 
about their game design. Exactly what documents they produce and what the doc-
uments are for vary from designer to designer and project to project—but they 
usually follow a common thread.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
55
 CHAPTER 2
Why Do We Need Documents?
Beginning game programmers often make the mistake of thinking up a game and 
then diving in and starting to program it right away. In modern commercial game 
development, however, this kind of ad hoc approach is disastrous. Different proj-
ects require different degrees of formality, but all serious game companies now 
insist on having some kind of written documentation as design work progresses.
A key part of game design is transmitting the design to other members of the team. 
In practice, a lot of that communication takes place not through the documents 
themselves but during team meetings and conversations over lunch. That doesn’t 
mean that there’s no point in writing design documents, however. The documents 
record decisions made and agreed upon orally; they create a paper trail. More 
important, the process of writing a document turns a vague idea into an explicit 
plan. Even if no one reads it at all, an idea written down is a decision made, a con-
clusion reached. If a feature of a game is not described in writing, there’s a good 
chance that it has been overlooked and that someone will have to make it up on 
the ﬂ y—or, worse, that each part of the team will have a different idea of what they 
intended to do. It’s far easier and cheaper to correct a design error before writing 
any code or creating any artwork. Depending on the size of the game, wise devel-
opers allot anywhere from one to six months for pure design work before starting 
on development, usually in combination with some throwaway prototype for test-
ing gameplay ideas.
Types of Design Documents
This section is a short introduction to the various types of documents a game 
designer might create: the high concept, game treatment, character design, world 
design, and story or level progression documents, as well as the ﬂ owboard and the 
game script. Each of these is deﬁ ned in the following sections. This isn’t an exhaus-
tive list, nor does every project need all of the items on the list. Rather, these are 
some of the most common ones.
The high concept and game treatment documents are sales tools, designed to help 
communicate the game concept to a funding agency such as a publisher. They are 
usually written in a word processor such as Microsoft Word and distributed in 
paper form. The other documents used to be written in a word processor as well, 
but it is increasingly common in the game industry to create them as pages on an 
internal company website or wiki. As long as you can keep the website secure, it’s a 
good way of documenting a game design so that all the members of the team can 
access it, and you can update it easily. Once the wiki software is installed on the 
company server, the whole team can edit the content using only a browser. Be sure 
you have revision control and backups so that you can revert to a previous edition 
if someone deletes a page by accident.
You can ﬁ nd samples (or pointers to samples) of design documents on the book’s 
companion website at www.peachpit.com/fgd2.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

56 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
HIGH CONCEPT DOCUMENT
The high concept document is not a document from which to build the game. Just as 
the purpose of a résumé is to get you a job interview, the purpose of a high concept 
document is to get you a hearing from someone, a producer or publishing executive. 
It puts your key ideas down on paper in a bite-size chunk that he can read in a few 
minutes. Like a résumé, it should be short—not more than two to four pages long.
It’s also worthwhile to write high concept documents for yourself, to record ideas 
that you might want to work on in the future.
GAME TREATMENT DOCUMENT
A game treatment document presents the game in a broad outline to someone who’s 
already interested in it and wants to hear more about it. Like a high concept docu-
ment, it’s primarily a sales tool. The treatment is designed both to satisfy initial 
curiosity and to stimulate real enthusiasm for the game. When you give a presenta-
tion about your game to a potential publisher, you should hand him the game 
treatment at the end so he has something to take away and look at, something that 
ﬂ oats around his ofﬁ ce and reminds him of your game. Your goal at this point is to 
get funding, either to create a more thorough design or a prototype or (preferably!) 
to develop the entire game.
The game treatment is still a simple document—almost a brochure that sums up 
the basic ideas in the game. A good way of picturing what to write in a treatment
is to imagine that you are making a website to help sell your game; then throw in 
some business and development details for good measure.
CHARACTER DESIGN DOCUMENT
A character design document is speciﬁ cally intended to record the design of one char-
acter who appears in your game, most often an avatar. Its primary purpose is to 
show the character’s appearance and above all her moveset—a list of animations 
that documents how she moves, both voluntarily and involuntarily. It should 
include plenty of concept art of the character in different poses and with different 
facial expressions. In addition, it should include background information about the 
character that helps inform future decisions: her history, values, likes and dislikes, 
strengths and weaknesses, and so on. Chapter 6 discusses character design in detail. 
WORLD DESIGN DOCUMENT
The world design document is the basis for building all the art and audio that portray 
your game world. It’s not a precise list of everything in the game but, rather, back-
ground information about the kinds of things the world contains. If you have a 
large landscape or cityscape, for example, the world design document should include
a map. You need not supply every detail, just a general overview. The level design-
ers and artists use this information to create the actual content. Be sure also to note 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
57
 CHAPTER 2
the sources of ambient sounds in the world so the audio designers can build them 
in at the appropriate locations.
The world design document should also document the “feel” of the world, its aes-
thetic style and emotional tone. If you want to arouse particular emotions through 
images and music, indicate how you will do so here.
FLOWBOARD
A ﬂ owboard is, as the name suggests, a cross between a ﬂ owchart and a storyboard. 
Storyboards are linear documents used by ﬁ lmmakers to plan a series of shots; ﬂ ow-
charts are used by programmers (though rarely nowadays) to document an algorithm. 
A ﬂ owboard combines these two ideas to document the structure of a game.
Although you can create a ﬂ owboard in an editor such as Microsoft Visio, it’s actu-
ally quicker and easier to make one on several sheets of paper and stick them on a 
large blank wall. Use each sheet of paper to document one gameplay mode or shell 
menu. On each page, write the name of the mode clearly at the top. Then, in the 
center of the page, draw a quick sketch of the screen as it appears in the mode, 
showing the perspective that the camera model implements and the user interface 
items that appear on it. Leave plenty of space around the edges. Off to the sides of 
the sketch, document the menu items and inputs available to the player and what 
they do. You can also list the challenges that arise in that mode, although that’s 
less important—the key thing is to indicate the player actions that are available. 
Then draw arrows leading to the other gameplay modes or shell menus and indi-
cate under what circumstances the game makes a transition from the current mode 
to the next one. By creating one mode per page and putting them up on the wall, 
you allow everyone in the ofﬁ ce to see the structure of the game. You can also eas-
ily make revisions by adding new sheets and marking up the existing ones.
STORY AND LEVEL PROGRESSION DOCUMENT
This document records the large-scale story of your game, if it has one, and the way 
the levels progress from one to the next. If you’re making a small game with only 
one level (such as a board game in computerized form) or a game with no story, 
you need not create this document. However, if the game has more than one level, 
or the player experiences a distinct sense of progress throughout the game, then 
you need such a document. You’re not trying to record everything that can happen 
in the game, but rather a general outline of the player’s experience from beginning 
to end. If the game’s story branches based upon the player’s actions, this is the 
place to document it and indicate what decisions cause the game to take one path 
rather than another. Here also you indicate how the player experiences the story: 
whether it’s told via cut-scenes, mission brieﬁ ngs, dialog, or other narrative elements.
Bear in mind that the story or level progression is not the same as the game’s struc-
ture. An entire story can take place in only one gameplay mode; likewise, a game 
can have many different gameplay modes but no story at all. Although the game 
TIP The game 
structure and the 
game story or level 
progression are not 
the same thing! Don’t 
confuse them. The 
structure deﬁ nes the 
relationships among 
the gameplay modes, 
documenting when 
and why the game 
changes from mode 
to mode. The story or 
level progression de-
scribes how the player 
experiences a sense 
of progress from the 
beginning of the game 
to the end.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

58 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
changes from mode to mode over time, and the story also progresses over time,
the two are not necessarily related.
THE GAME SCRIPT
Back when games were smaller, it was common to incorporate all the preceding 
documents except for the high concept and treatment into a single massive tome, 
the game script (or “bible”). As games have gotten larger, the industry has tended 
to break out the character, world, and story documentation into individual docu-
ments to make them more manageable. The game script documents a key area not 
covered by the other documents: the rules and core mechanics of the game.
As a good rule of thumb, the game script should enable you to play the game. That 
is, it should specify the rules of play in enough detail that you could, in theory, 
play the game without the use of a computer—maybe as a (complicated) board 
game or tabletop role-playing game. This doesn’t mean you should actually sit 
down and play it as such, but it should theoretically be possible to do so, based 
solely on the game script document. Sitting down and playing paper versions of 
game ideas is a very inexpensive way of getting valuable feedback on your game 
design. For designers without huge teams and equally huge budgets, paper-play test-
ing is an invaluable tool.
The game script does not include the technical design, though it may include the 
target machine and minimum technical speciﬁ cations. It should not address how 
to build or implement the game software. The technical design document, if there 
is one, is usually based on the game script and is written by the lead programmer or 
technical director for the game. Technical design is beyond the scope of this book. 
If you want to know more about technical design, read Game Architecture and Design
by Rollings and Morris (Rollings and Morris, 2003).
The Anatomy of a Game Designer
Like all crafts, game design requires both talent and skill. Talent is innate, but skill 
is learned. Effective game designers require a wide base of skills. The following sec-
tions discuss some of the most useful skills for the professional game designer. 
Don’t be discouraged if you don’t possess all of them. It’s a wish list—the character-
istics of a hypothetical “ideal designer.”
Imagination
A game exists in an artiﬁ cial universe, a make-believe place governed by make-
believe rules. Imagination is essential to creating this place. It comes in various forms:
■ Visual and auditory imagination enables you to think of new buildings, trees, 
animals, creatures, clothing, and people—how they look and sound.
NOTE Imagination 
does not consist only 
of the ability to invent 
new things. It’s also 
valuable to be able to 
look at an old idea and 
breathe new life into it 
with a fresh approach. 
J.K. Rowling does this 
brilliantly in her Harry 
Potter novels. She still 
has witches ﬂ ying on 
broomsticks, but she 
invented the sport of 
Quidditch, which is 
played while ﬂ ying
on them.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
59
 CHAPTER 2
■ Dramatic imagination is required for the development of good characters, plots, 
scenes, motivations, emotions, climaxes, and conclusions.
■ Conceptual imagination is about relationships between ideas, their interactions, 
and dependencies.
■ Lateral thinking is the process of looking for alternative answers, taking an 
unexpected route to solve a problem.
■ Deduction is the process of reasoning from a creative decision you’ve made to its 
possible consequences. Deduction isn’t ordinarily thought of as imagination, but 
the conclusions you arrive at produce new material for your game.
Technical Awareness
Technical awareness is a general understanding of how computer programs, partic-
ularly games, actually work. You don’t have to be a software engineer, but it is 
extremely valuable to have had a little programming experience. Level designers, 
in particular, often need to be able to program in simple scripting languages. Get to 
know the technical capabilities of your target platform. You must also be aware of 
what your machine cannot do so that you don’t create unworkable designs. For 
example, many low-end mobile phones don’t have enough processing power to do 
3D rendering. 
Analytical Competence
Analytical competence is the ability to study and dissect something: an idea, a 
problem, or an entire game design. No design is perfect from the start; game design 
is a process of iterative reﬁ nement. Consequently, you must be able to recognize the 
good and bad parts of a design for what they are.
One example of an analytical task is detecting dominant (that is, unbeatable or 
nearly unbeatable) strategies at the design phase and weeding them out before they 
get into the code, as in the infamous Red Alert “tank rush.” In Command & Conquer: 
Red Alert, tanks on the Soviet side are so much more effective than any other unit 
that an experienced player can dedicate all production to cranking out a few tanks 
and then immediately storm the opposition base before the enemy has a chance to 
get a production line set up.
Mathematical Competence
Designers must have basic math skills, including trigonometry and the simpler 
principles of probability. Balancing games that feature complex internal economies, 
such as business simulations or real-time strategy games, can require you to spend a 
lot of time looking at numbers. You don’t need a PhD in mathematics, but you 
should be comfortable with the subject. You may be able to handle most of the 
requirements with a spreadsheet program such as Microsoft Excel.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

60 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Aesthetic Competence
Although you need not be an artist, you should have a general aesthetic compe-
tence and some sense of style. Far too many games are visual clones of one another, 
depending on stereotypes and clichés rather than real imagination. It’s up to you 
(along with your lead artist) to set the visual tone of the game and to create a con-
sistent, harmonious look.
Expand your aesthetic horizons as much as you can. Learn a little about the funda-
mentals of art: the principles of composition, and which colors coordinate and 
which clash. Find out about famous art movements—Art Nouveau, Surrealism, 
Impressionism—and how they changed the way we see things. Watch movies that 
are famous for their visual style, such as Metropolis or Blade Runner. Then move on 
to the more practical arts: architecture, interior decoration, industrial design. The 
more aesthetic experience you have, the more likely you are to produce an artisti-
cally innovative product.
General Knowledge and the Ability to Research
The most imaginative game designers are those who have been broadly educated 
and are interested in a wide variety of things. It helps to be well versed in such top-
ics as history, literature, art, science, and political affairs. More important, you 
must know how to research the subject of your game. It’s tempting just to use a 
search engine on the Internet, but that’s not very efﬁ cient because the information 
it presents is haphazard and disorganized and might not be reliable. The encyclope-
dia is a better place to start for any given subject. From there, you can increase your 
knowledge of a particular area by moving on to more specialized books or TV 
documentaries.
Writing Skills
A professional game designer actually spends most of his time writing, so a designer
must have good writing skills. This means being clear, concise, accurate, and unam-
biguous. Apart from having to write several detailed documents for each design, 
you might be expected to produce the story narrative or dialog—especially if the 
budget won’t stretch to include a scriptwriter.
Design writing comes in several forms:
■ Technical writing is the process of documenting the design in preparation for 
development. The essential mechanisms of the game have to be answered unam-
biguously and precisely.
■ Fiction writing (narrative) creates the story of the game as a whole—a critical 
part of the design process if the game has a strong storyline. Some of this material 
may appear in the ﬁ nished product as text or voiceover narration. The game’s man-
ual, if there is one, often includes ﬁ ctional material as well.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
61
 CHAPTER 2
■ Dialog writing (drama) is needed for audio voiceovers and cinematic material. 
Dialog conveys character, and it also can form part of the plot. A class in playwrit-
ing or screenwriting teaches you a lot about writing dialog.
A designer must be able to convey the details of the design to the rest of the team, 
create the textual and spoken material that appears in the game, and help sell the 
idea to a publisher. Good writing skills are essential to accomplish these things 
successfully.
Drawing Skills
Some skill at basic drawing and sketching is highly valuable, although not abso-
lutely required for a designer if you have a concept artist to work with. The vast 
majority of computer games rely heavily on visual content, and drawings are essen-
tial when you’re pitching a product to a third party. Game-publishing executives 
are interested in a hot concept, a hot market, or a hot license, but only pictures 
really excite them. The images remain in their memories long after they forget the 
details.
The Ability to Synthesize
Synthesis, in this context, means bringing together different ideas and construct-
ing something new from them. Different people on the development team and at 
the publishing company have concerns about their own areas of expertise (pro-
gramming, art, music, and so on), and their opinions pull and push the design in 
different directions. A professional game designer must be able to synthesize a con-
sistent, holistic vision of a game from this variety of opinions. As the designer, you 
may be tempted to seek sole ownership of the vision and insist that things must be 
exactly as you imagined them. You must resist the temptation to do that, for two 
reasons:
■ First, you must allow your team some ownership of the vision as well, or its 
members won’t have any motivation or enthusiasm for the project. No one builds 
computer games solely for the money; we’re all here so that we can contribute 
creatively.
■ Second, a designer who can’t deliver in a team environment, no matter how 
visionary she may be, doesn’t stay employed for long. You must be able to work
successfully with other people.
Game design always requires compromise. Compromise means more than just 
negotiating with other people, however; it also means working within the prevail-
ing circumstances. In many cases, you are given a task that limits you to designing 
a genre clone or a heavily restricted licensed property. On a commercial project, 
you are almost certainly told, rather than get to choose, the target hardware upon 
which your game will run. Your project always has a desired budget and schedule 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

