DESIGN COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES 
63
 CHAPTER 2
Design Practice EXERCISES
In these exercises, you document existing games for practice. Your instructor may 
require that you do so with certain particular games that he is familiar with, and 
he sets the expected scope of the work—the amount of material he wants to see. 
Use a document template from the companion website or one supplied by your 
instructor.
1. Document the primary gameplay mode of a reasonably simple game that you 
like. Be sure to include a sketch of the screen, including the camera model and user 
interface; a list of all the buttons and menu items available in that mode; and a list 
of the other modes that this mode can switch to. Describe the challenges and 
actions that make up the mode.
2. Take a classic, well-known arcade game with a small number of gameplay modes 
and shell menus, and create a ﬂ owboard for it. (As you cannot hand in an entire 
wall of pages, create a miniature version with two or three gameplay modes per 
sheet.)
3. Document the level progression of a well-known game that you have played all 
the way through, such as StarCraft or Fallout 3. (If the game does not have explicit 
levels, as in Half-Life, document major areas or sections of the game.) Describe the 
game world in each level and the types of challenges that it presents. If the levels 
are integrated into a story, explain how each level supports or relates to the story.
4. Research one of the following art or design styles from history and write a short 
paper to explain how it might help to establish an emotional tone in a video game: 
Impressionism, Constructivism, Symbolism, Pop Art, Art Deco, Art Nouveau. Back 
up your argument with examples from famous paintings or other works in that style.
Design Practice QUESTIONS
1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of player-centric game design? In what 
ways might it conﬂ ict with other requirements imposed on the game or with the 
desires of the game designer?
2. Do you feel that the list of qualities in an ideal game designer is complete? What 
other qualities might you add? Are there any that you would remove?
3. The list of members of a design team does not include a lead programmer. 
Should it? Suggest some arguments for and against.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Game Concepts
Designing a video game begins with an idea. This chapter discusses how to turn 
that idea into a game concept, a more ﬂ eshed-out version of the idea that can be 
used as the basis for further discussion and development. Creating a game concept 
is what you do in the concept stage of game design. Your goal at this point should 
be to write the high concept document that Chapter 2, “Design Components and 
Processes,” discussed. To do this, you don’t have to have all the details worked out 
yet, but you do need to understand clearly what your game is about, and you must 
be able to answer certain essential questions about the game itself, the player’s role 
in it, and the target audience. Here, we look at how to make those decisions.
Getting an Idea
You can ﬁ nd game ideas almost anywhere but only if you’re looking for them. 
Creativity is an active, not a passive, process. Look everywhere; some of the most 
unexpected things can hide a game idea. Viva Piñata, for instance, is a slightly odd 
but highly successful game about “breeding” living piñatas.
One idea isn’t enough. It’s a common misconception that a brilliant game idea will 
make you a fortune. In fact, this occurs extremely rarely. Even if you think you have 
the game idea of the century, you should always look out for more. Make a note of 
each one and go on. If one seems especially promising, then start to expand and 
reﬁ ne it, but don’t let that prevent you from thinking about other games as well. 
Dreaming the Dream
A lot of computer games are light entertainment, designed to while away a few 
minutes with a puzzle or a simple challenge. But larger, richer games begin with a 
dream. If you’ve ever thought to yourself, “I wish I could… ” or “Imagine what it 
would be like to…,” then you’ve taken an important step on the road to creating a 
computer game. Computers can create almost any sort of visual experience you can 
imagine, even experiences that are physically impossible in the real world. The 
design of a computer game begins with the question, “What dream am I going to 
fulﬁ ll?”
Perhaps it’s a dream of exploring a dungeon infested with monsters. Perhaps it’s a 
dream of coaching a football team. Perhaps it’s a dream of being a fashion designer. 
But before you do anything else, you must dream the dream. Understand it. Feel it. 
Know who else dreams it and why.
CHAPTER 3
64


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME CONCEPTS 
65
 CHAPTER 3
Game Ideas from Other Media
Books, movies, television, and other entertainment media can be great sources of 
inspiration for game ideas, so long as the ideas include plenty of activity. Cop 
shows from the 1970s inspired the game Interstate ’76 (see Figure 3.1). Movies such 
as the James Bond series often inspire games. Any story containing exciting action 
with something important at stake can form the kernel of a game. Think over the 
books you’ve read and the movies you’ve seen and ask yourself whether any of the 
activities in them could serve as the basis for a game.
You can’t, of course, steal other people’s intellectual property. Even if the Pirates of 
the Caribbean ride at Disneyland seems like the basis for a great game, you can’t 
make it without Disney’s approval. But you can certainly make a lighthearted game 
about pirates—as LucasArts did with its Monkey Island series.
You should also look beyond the usual science ﬁ ction and fantasy genres and 
beyond the usual sources like novels and movies. How about poetry? Beowulf’s
epic battle with the monster Grendel and then his even more terrible battle with 
Grendel’s mother in a cave at the bottom of a lake sound like the basis for a game. 
“The Charge of the Light Brigade” might make you wonder about cavalry tactics. 
Would a game based on cavalry warfare be interesting to anyone? It’s worth think-
ing about.
FIGURE 3.1
Interstate ’76 was 
a great game 
inspired by another 
medium—television.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

66 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Game ideas can crop up in all sorts of unlikely places. The smash-hit game fran-
chise The Sims was partly inspired by a nonﬁ ction book by Christopher Alexander 
called A Pattern Language (Alexander, 1977), which is about the way people’s lives 
are affected by the design of their houses. Just as great scientists look at even the 
most common things in the world—light, air, gravity—and ask how they work, 
great game designers are always looking at the world and wondering what parts of 
it they can make into a game. The trick to ﬁ nding original ideas, beyond the elf-
and-wizard combinations that have been done so often, is to develop a game 
designer’s instincts, to look for the fun and challenge even in things that don’t 
sound like games at all.
Game Ideas from Other Games
A great many people who play computer games want to design them as well. When 
you play a lot of games, you develop a sense of how they work and what their good 
and bad points are. Playing games is a valuable experience for a game designer. It 
gives you insight and lets you compare and contrast the features of different games.
Sometimes new game ideas are motivated by a desire to improve an existing game. 
We think, “If I had designed this game, I would have….” To learn from other 
games, you have to pay attention as you play. Don’t just play them for fun; look at 
them seriously and think about how they work. Take notes especially of things that 
you like or don’t like and of features that seem to work particularly well or not well 
at all. How do resources ﬂ ow into the game? How do they ﬂ ow out? How much of 
your success comes from luck? How much from skill?
As creative people, our instinct is to devise totally new kinds of games that have 
never been seen before. Unfortunately, publishers want games that they are sure 
they can sell, and that usually means variations of existing games, perhaps with a 
new twist that can be used in marketing. This explains why we keep seeing sequels 
and thinly disguised copies of earlier games. As designers, we have to learn to bal-
ance the tension between our own desire to innovate and the publisher’s need for 
the comfortably familiar. Leonardo da Vinci warned against persistent imitation,
in his Treatise on Painting:
The painter will produce pictures of little merit if he takes the work of others as his 
standard; but if he will apply himself to learn from the objects of nature he will produce 
good results. This we see was the case with the painters who came after the Romans, 
for they continually imitated each other, and from age to age their art steadily 
declined…. It is safer to go directly to the works of nature than to those which have 
been imitated from her originals, with great deterioration and thereby to acquire a
bad method, for he who has access to the fountain does not go to the water pot.
Deriving game ideas from other games tends to produce games that look or work 
alike. Studying other games is an excellent way to learn how they function, but if 
pursued exclusively, imitation produces similarity and, ultimately, mediocrity. The 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME CONCEPTS 
67
 CHAPTER 3
greatest games break new ground. They’re unlike anything seen on the store 
shelves before.
Communicating Your Dream to Others
A dream is a fantasy that you have by yourself; a computer game is something that 
you make for someone else. You and your development team are entertainers. If 
your game is in a well-known genre and setting (for example, a World War II ﬂ ight 
simulator), you can be pretty certain that a number of people already share your 
dream. But if your game is in a new setting (a futuristic city of your imagination, 
for example)—and especially if you are opening up a new genre—you have to be 
very careful and thorough in communicating your dream to others. Some of the 
ﬁ rst questions a publishing executive is going to ask you are, “Why would anyone 
want to play this game?” and “What’s going to make someone buy this game 
instead of another?”
So what does it mean to entertain someone? Many people think entertainment is 
synonymous with having fun, but even that isn’t completely straightforward. 
People have fun in all kinds of ways. Some of those ways involve hard work, such 
as gardening or building a new deck. Some of them involve frustration, such as 
solving a puzzle. Some, such as athletic competitions, even involve pain. One per-
son’s entertainment is another person’s insufferable boredom. To build a game that 
entertains, you must know who it will entertain and how. Chapter 1, “Games and 
Video Games,” discussed a variety of ways in which video games entertain people. 
Keep them in mind as your work takes you from dream to game.
From Idea to Game Concept
Chapter 2 described a game concept as “a general idea of how you intend to enter-
tain someone through gameplay.” That description was accurate enough for an 
overview, but to discuss game concepts in detail, we need a more complete 
explanation.
A game concept is a description of a game detailed enough to begin discussing it as 
a potential commercial product—a piece of software that the public might want to 
buy. It should include, at a minimum, the following key points:
■ A high concept statement, which is a two- or three-sentence description of what 
the game is about. Here’s a high concept statement for a game about street football: 
The game at its grittiest. No pads, no helmets, no refs, no ﬁ eld. Just you and the 
guys, a ball, and a lot of concrete.
■ The player’s role(s) in the game, if the game is representational enough to have 
roles. If the player will have an avatar, describe the avatar character brieﬂ y.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

68 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ A proposed primary gameplay mode, including camera model, interaction 
model, and general types of challenges the player(s) will experience in that mode.
■ The genre of the game or, if you think it is a hybrid, which features it will
incorporate from the different genres to which it belongs. If it is an entirely new 
kind of game, include an explanation of why its gameplay doesn’t ﬁ t into any
existing genre.
■ A description of the target audience for the game.
■ The name of the machine on which the game will run and details of any special 
equipment the game will require (for example, a camera or dance mat).
■ The licenses that the game will exploit, if any.
■ The competition modes that the game will support: single-, dual-, or multi-
player; competitive or cooperative.
■ A general summary of how the game will progress from beginning to end, 
including a few ideas for levels or missions and a synopsis of the storyline, if the 
game has one.
■ A short description of the game world.
You should put all these items into a high concept document. This chapter dis-
cusses how to think about these issues, except for a few that are self-explanatory or 
are covered in earlier chapters. You can see a sample high concept document on the 
companion website.
In a commercial environment, a publisher wants to see several additional details: 
the game’s potential competition, the unique selling points (often abbreviated USPs) 
that make your game stand out in the marketplace, and possible marketing strate-
gies and related merchandising opportunities.
As you can see, a game concept is much more than an idea. It is an idea that you 
have thought about and begun to develop. A game concept contains enough detail 
that you can begin discussing how it will feel to play the game and what further 
design work you need to create the game.
The Player’s Role
To understand your own game and to explain it to others, you must know what the 
player will do, and in a sense, what the player will be in the game world—what her 
role is. These are the ﬁ rst questions you face in creating your game concept.
What Is the Player Going to Do?
It’s sometimes tempting to start thinking about a game in terms of its setting or its 
characters. For example, “Wouldn’t it be fun to play a game set in ancient Rome?” 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME CONCEPTS 
69
 CHAPTER 3
or “Wouldn’t it be fun to play a game as Indiana Jones?” These are reasonable ideas, 
and of course many games have been made from both of them. However, you can-
not make a game from a setting or character alone. The ﬁ rst step toward turning 
the idea into a game concept is to answer the question, “What is the player going to 
do?”
This is the single most important question you can ask yourself at the concept 
stage. You don’t have to assign activities to input devices yet (“the X button kicks 
and the O button punches”), but you do have to know the activities that you want 
to offer the player—the verbs of the game. For games in some genres, the answer is 
simple and obvious: drive a race car or ﬁ ght in a boxing match. For games in other 
genres, such as role-playing games, the question may have many answers: explore, 
ﬁ ght, cast spells, collect objects, buy and sell, talk to dragons.
Video games allow someone to play—that is, to act. The player has purchased the 
game in order to do something, not just to see, hear, or read something. Interactivity
is the raison d’être of all gaming; it is what sets gaming apart from presentational 
forms of entertainment such as books and movies. The correct answer to the ques-
tion, “Wouldn’t it be fun to play a game set in ancient Rome?” is another question: 
“Yes, it would. What kinds of things could a player do in ancient Rome?” The more 
precise you are, the better. Avoid generalities such as “the player builds a city,” and 
think of the exact verbs to assign to the input devices: buy land, sell land, con-
struct a road, and so on.
DESIGN RULE Think About Player Actions First
Do not start designing the story, avatar, game world, artwork, or anything else until you 
have answered the question “What is the player going to do?”
Deﬁ ning the Role
Playing a game, especially board games and computer games, often involves play-
ing a role of some sort. In Monopoly, the role is real estate tycoon. In From Russia 
with Love, the role is James Bond. Deﬁ ning the player’s role in the game world is a 
key part of deﬁ ning your game’s concept. If the player’s role is difﬁ cult to describe, 
that role might be difﬁ cult for the player to grasp as well, and that may indicate 
conceptual problems with the game. This doesn’t mean that the role always has to 
be simple or that the player sticks to just one role per game. In many sports games, 
for example, the player can be an athlete, a coach, or the general manager. In team 
games, the player often switches from one athlete to another as play progresses.
Shifting roles work well in a sports game because the game’s audience understands 
them, but if your game takes place in a less familiar world with less familiar objec-
tives, you must make the roles especially clear. If the player’s role changes from 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

70
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
time to time—especially involuntarily—the player must know why it changed and 
how to adapt to the new circumstances.
If you explain the player’s role clearly, it helps him understand what he’s trying to 
achieve and what rules govern the game. In America’s Army, for instance, the player 
takes on the role of a real-world soldier. Real soldiers can’t just shoot anything that 
moves; they have to obey rules of engagement. By telling the player that the role is 
based on reality rather than fantasy, the game designer ensures that the player 
knows his actions will have to be more cautious than in the usual frenetic shooter.
In deﬁ ning the player’s role, you face the question of how realistic you want your 
game to be. At the concept stage, you need not—and should not—start deﬁ ning
the details of the core mechanics and the presentation layer, but you should have
a general idea of whether you want your game to be abstract or representational. 
Other considerations, such as the target audience (discussed in the section 
“Deﬁ ning Your Target Audience,” later in this chapter) may inﬂ uence that decision.
Choosing a Genre
In describing movies or books, the term genre refers to the content of the work. 
Historical ﬁ ction, romance ﬁ ction, spy ﬁ ction, and so on are genres of popular ﬁ c-
tion. With video games, however, genre refers to the types of challenges that a game 
offers. In games, the genres are independent of the content. Action games are one 
genre; they are set in the Old West, in a fantasy world, or in outer space, and they 
are still all action games. In his lecture “Imagining New Game Styles” at the 2005 
Futureplay conference, the designer and commentator Greg Costikyan wrote that 
he prefers the term game style rather than game genre to avoid this difference in 
meaning among the different media (Costikyan, 2005), but this book will continue 
to use genre because it is more widely recognized.
GENRE A genre is a category of games characterized by a particular set of challenges, 
regardless of setting or game-world content.
The Classic Game Genres
As you ﬂ esh out your concept, consider whether or not it falls into one of the classic 
video game genre descriptions that follow. Later chapters look at these genres in 
detail, examining each to see how it differs from the others and what special 
design considerations apply to it. For now, here’s a brief introduction to the genres.
■ Action games include physical challenges. They may also incorporate puzzles, 
races, and a variety of conﬂ ict challenges, typically among a small number of char-
acters. Action games often contain simple economic challenges as well, usually 
involving collecting objects. They seldom include strategic or conceptual chal-
lenges. Action games may be further subdivided into a variety of sub-genres. Two
of the best known are shooter games and ﬁ ghting games.
TIP The easier it is 
to explain the player’s 
role, the easier it is 
for the publisher, the 
retailer, and the cus-
tomer to understand 
it… and to decide to 
spend money on it. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME CONCEPTS 
71
 CHAPTER 3
■ Strategy games include strategic (naturally), tactical, and sometimes logistical 
challenges. They may also offer economic and exploration challenges to lengthen 
the game and give it more variety. Once in a while, they also have a physical chal-
lenge thrown in for spice, but this often annoys strategically minded players.
■ Most role-playing games involve tactical, logistical, and exploration challenges. 
They also include economic challenges because the games usually involve collect-
ing loot and trading it in for better weapons. They sometimes include puzzles and 
conceptual challenges, but rarely physical ones.
■ Real-world simulations include sports games and vehicle simulations, including 
military vehicles. They involve mostly physical and tactical challenges but not 
exploration, economic, or conceptual ones.
■ Construction and management games such as RollerCoaster Tycoon primarily 
offer economic and conceptual challenges. Only rarely do they involve conﬂ ict or 
exploration, and they almost never include physical challenges.
■ Adventure games chieﬂ y provide exploration and puzzle-solving. They some-
times contain conceptual challenges as well. Adventure games may include a 
physical challenge also, but only rarely.
■ Puzzle games offer logic challenges and conceptual challenges almost exclu-
sively, although occasionally there’s time pressure or an action element.
You will probably ﬁ nd that it’s much easier to design a game that ﬁ ts within one 
well-known genre than it is to design one outside of any existing genre. If you 
choose to design in an existing genre, you can study the many games that already 
belong to it for inspiration. You will also know which challenges to concentrate on 
and which to leave out.
Hybrid Games
Some games cross genres, combining features not typically found together. This 
occasionally happens when two people on the design team want the game to 
belong to different genres, and they compromise by including challenges from 
both. Crossing genres is also sometimes an effort to appeal to a larger audience by 
including elements that audiences for both genres like. By far the most successful 
hybrid is the action-adventure, as seen in the more recent Legend of Zelda games. 
(The earlier 2D Zelda games were almost entirely action games.) Action-adventures 
are still mostly action, but they include a story and puzzles that give them some of 
the qualities of adventure games. Although it can add ﬂ avor and interest to a game, 
crossing genres is a risky move. Rather than appealing to two groups, you might 
end up appealing to neither. Many players (and game reviewers) prefer particular 
genres and don’t want to be confronted by challenges of a kind that they normally 
avoid. Retailers who plan to purchase a certain number of games from each genre 
for their stores might not know on which shelf to put the game, and so will shy 
away from it entirely.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

72 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
However, you should not allow these genre descriptions to circumscribe your cre-
ativity—especially at the concept stage. If you have a wholly new, never-before-seen 
type of game in mind, design it as you envision it; don’t try to shoehorn it into a 
genre to which it doesn’t belong. A game needs to be true to itself, so a truly hybrid 
game may need to mix challenges that aren’t typically presented together. But 
don’t mix characteristics of different genres without good reason; a game should 
cross genres only if it genuinely needs to as part of the gameplay. A ﬂ ight simulator 
with a logic puzzle inserted in the middle of the game just to make the game differ-
ent from other ﬂ ight simulators will only annoy ﬂ ight sim fans.
Deﬁ ning Your Target Audience
Many game designers make the mistake of thinking that all players enjoy the same 
things that the designer enjoys, so the designer has only to examine his own expe-
rience to know how to make a game entertaining. This is dangerous hubris. We 
make video games to entertain an audience. You must think about wh o your audi-
ence is and what they like.
Unless you have been commissioned by a single individual, you design a game for a 
class of people, not for one person. At this early stage, you must think about your 
audience broadly, as a group of people that you hope will enjoy your game. One of the 
ﬁ rst questions a publisher will ask you is, “Who will buy this game?” Think carefully 
about the answer. What characteristics are your players likely to have in common? 
What things set them apart from other gamers? What challenges do they enjoy? 
More important, what challenges do they not enjoy? What interests them, bores 
them, frustrates them, excites them, frightens them, and offends them? Answer 
these questions, and keep the answers close at hand as you design your game.
THE PLAYER-CENTRIC PHILOSOPHY AND THE TARGET AUDIENCE
As Chapter 2 explained, the player-centric philosophy of game design requires that you 
think about how your design decisions affect a representative player’s experience of the 
game. This approach ensures that your decisions serve the player’s interests ﬁ rst, espe-
cially in the later stages of development when you are often tempted to make decisions 
based on cost or convenience.
A game concept is not complete without a statement describing its intended audience.
Deﬁ ning a target audience is not the same as player-centric design. You can apply 
the player-centric approach only after you have deﬁ ned the target audience. You 
must begin by asking yourself the question, “Who am I trying to entertain?” Once 
you have that answer, you can use it to apply the player-centric approach to other 
design issues, asking yourself, “Does this feature entertain a representative player 
from my target audience?”


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME CONCEPTS 
73
 CHAPTER 3
Dangers of Binary Thinking
You can’t make a game for everyone, so your target audience is necessarily a subset 
of all possible players, a subset determined by your answers to the questions “Who 
will enjoy this game?” and “What kinds of challenges do they like?” As you answer 
these questions, you may be tempted to assume that the people in one category 
(adult men, for example) are a special audience that has nothing in common with 
people in other categories (adult women, children, teenagers, and so on). This is 
binary thinking: assuming that if group A likes a thing, everyone outside that group 
won’t like it. It’s unsound reasoning and may actually cause you to lose part of your 
potential customer base, as the following sections demonstrate.
REASONING STATISTICALLY ABOUT PLAYER GROUPS
Suppose you ask a group of players to rate their level of interest in a particular game 
on a scale of 0 to 10, with 0 representing no interest at all and 10 being fanatical 
enthusiasm. Like many phenomena, the overall population’s level of interest resembles 
a bell-shaped curve, with small numbers of people at the extremes and the majority 
somewhere in the middle. If you graph the responses of men and women separately, 
you may ﬁ nd for a given game that the two groups have different arithmetic means; 
that is, the centers of their bell-shaped curves fall at different places on the graph.
Figure 3.2 shows this phenomenon. For the hypothetical game in question, men’s 
mean level of interest is at about 5.5, while women’s mean level of interest is at 4.5.
FIGURE 3.2
Reported level of 
interest in a game
on a 0–10 scale
Number of respondents 
reporting to a given level 
of interest in a game.
Data from women
Data from men
0
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Number of men 
reporting an interest 
level of 6.
Number of women 
reporting an interest 
level of 6.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

74 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Note that while the graph does support the statement, “Men have a higher level of 
interest in this game than women do,” in fact, a large area of overlap indicates that 
a signiﬁ cant portion of the women surveyed are interested in the game as well. 
Furthermore, the number of women reporting an interest level of 6 is about two-
thirds that of the number of men reporting the same interest level. In other words, 
two-ﬁ fths of all the people reporting an interest level of 6 are women—far too 
many to simply ignore.
This is only a hypothetical example. With some games, the level of overlap may be 
small, and there is no point in trying to reach out to an audience that simply isn’t 
there. A game for ﬁ ve-year-olds won’t appeal to many ﬁ fteen-year-olds. The point, 
however, is that for most ordinary games there is some overlap among different
populations. It is foolish to ignore, or worse yet, offend a minority audience simply 
because it is in the minority, without knowing how many people fall into that cate-
gory. If you ignore or repel a signiﬁ cant minority, you’re throwing money away, 
something your publisher won’t thank you for.
STRIVE FOR INCLUSIVENESS, NOT UNIVERSALITY
You cannot make a game that appeals to everyone by throwing in a hodgepodge of 
features because group A likes some of them and group B likes others. If you do, 
you will produce a game that has too many features and no harmony. For instance, 
you can’t make a game that appeals to action fans, to strategy fans, and to fans of 
management simulations by combining kung fu, chess, and Monopoly—the result 
would be a mess that appeals to none of them. On the other hand, you can include 
a storyline in a ﬁ ghting game so long as the storyline doesn’t interfere with the 
gameplay. The storyline adds depth to the game without driving away its key mar-
ket of ﬁ ghting-game enthusiasts, and it might attract the interest of people who 
otherwise wouldn’t pay any attention to a ﬁ ghting game. Heavenly Sword and God
of War are good examples. 
Certain groups are turned off by particular content or features. For example, 
women don’t much care for material that portrays them as brainless sex objects; 
parents won’t buy games for their kids if the games are nothing but blood and gore; 
members of minority races (and many in the majority too) are naturally offended 
by racist content. These are the most obvious examples, but there are more subtle 
ones as well. Women are generally more sensitive to the aesthetics of a game than 
men are, and they are less likely to buy a game with ugly artwork. Some players 
have no interest in narrative material and are put off if they are forced to watch it 
in a genre that doesn’t normally include narratives. (This is why the storyline in 
the kung fu game, mentioned earlier, shouldn’t interfere with the gameplay.) These 
examples illustrate the effects of exclusionary material—content or features that 
serve to drive players away from a game that they otherwise might like. Your goal 
should be to make the best game that you can about your chosen subject, while 
avoiding exclusionary material that reduces the size of your audience.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME CONCEPTS 
75
 CHAPTER 3
DESIGN RULE Keep Exclusionary Material Out of Your Game
To reach a large audience while still creating a harmonious, coherent game, don’t try to 
attract everyone by adding unrelated features. Instead, work to avoid repelling people 
who might otherwise be attracted.
Core Versus Casual
The most signiﬁ cant distinction among player types is not between console-game 
players and computer-game players, nor between men and women, nor even 
between children and adults. The most signiﬁ cant distinction is between hardcore 
(usually just shortened to “core”) gamers and casual gamers.
Core gamers play a lot of games. Games are more than light entertainment to 
them; games are a hobby that demands time and money. Core gamers subscribe to 
game magazines, chat on game bulletin boards, and build fan websites about their 
favorite games. Above all, core gamers play for the exhilaration of defeating the 
game. They tolerate frustration well because of the charge they get out of ﬁ nally 
winning. The greater the obstacle, the greater the sense of achievement. Core gam-
ers thrive on competition. They don’t like games that are easy; they like games that 
are challenging.
By comparison, casual gamers play for the sheer enjoyment of the experience. If the 
game stops being enjoyable or becomes frustrating, the casual gamer stops playing. 
For the casual gamer, playing a game must be entertaining, whether it’s competitive or 
not. A casual gamer is simply not willing to spend hours learning complex controls or 
getting killed again and again until he ﬁ nds the one weak point in an otherwise invin-
cible enemy; he feels that he has better things to do with his time. To design a game 
for casual gamers, you have to give them a sense of rapid progress and achievement.
In reality, of course, there are as many types of gamer as there are games; everyone 
has a reason for playing computer games. But the casual/core distinction is a very 
powerful one. If you design a game speciﬁ cally for one group, you almost certainly 
won’t have a lot of sales to the other group. A few very well-designed games man-
age to appeal to both: Goldeneye, for example, can be played happily by both core 
and casual gamers. Core gamers can set the game at the highest difﬁ culty level and 
drive themselves crazy trying to cut 15 seconds off the last time it took to play a 
mission. Casual gamers can set the game at the easiest level and blast away, enjoy-
ing the game’s smooth controls and visual detail.
Other Distinctions
Several other groups exhibit particular trends in their game-playing preferences, 
and a brief list follows. Note that this section is about choosing a target audience, 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

76 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
not about actually designing a game for one. If you want to make your game partic-
ularly appealing to a special group, see Appendix A, “Designing to Appeal to 
Particular Groups.” 
■ Men and women. Men and women are not nearly as different as various works 
of pop psychology like us to believe. A large number of games are made with only 
male players in mind, but it doesn’t take much to make them more appealing to 
women as well. See Sheri Graner Ray’s Gender Inclusive Game Design for a thorough 
discussion of the subject (Ray, 2003).
■ Children and adults. Children’s gaming preferences and abilities differ much 
more sharply from those of adults than men’s differ from women’s. Children have 
different motor and cognitive skills, different attention spans, and different lin-
guistic abilities, and all of these change dramatically as children grow up. Most 
important, however, games designed for children must be appealing and acceptable 
to their parents as well. There is a vast amount of research on creating entertain-
ment for children. If you’re interested in targeting this market speciﬁ cally, you 
might start with Chapter 9 of the book Digital Storytelling: A Creator’s Guide to 
Interactive Entertainment by Carolyn Handler Miller (Miller, 2004).
■ Boys and girls. For years, the male-dominated game industry had a precon-
ceived notion that girls didn’t play video games, so the designers didn’t bother to 
think about girls. This idea was wrong, however. Girls were playing video games, in 
spite of the industry’s neglect. Still, boys’ and girls’ interests differ more widely than 
men’s and women’s do, and making games that appeal to girls requires knowledge 
that few designers have. Appendix A contains a discussion about games for girls.
■ Players with disabilities. A number of developers are working to improve the 
accessibility of video games to players with disabilities. Although few games are 
made speciﬁ cally for people with special needs, it is easy and inexpensive to make 
games more accessible. You can make your game available to the deaf by including 
subtitles for spoken dialog and providing visual as well as auditory cues for particu-
lar events; you can allow players with visual impairments to adjust the contrast of 
the screen and the font size of any text in the game. 
■ Players of other cultures. The process of adapting a game for sale in a country 
other than the one for which it was made is called localization. The process involves 
more than just translating the text to a different language and rerecording the 
audio; for the game to be a hit, you must take numerous cultural factors into 
account. It is far easier to make a game enjoyable to people in other countries if you 
plan it that way and consider them a part of your target audience from the begin-
ning. Designing for localization is outside the scope of this book, but if you want a 
worldwide market, you must take the time to research the subject.
Progression Considerations
If your game will be a long one, the player will need a sense of progress through it. 
At this stage of game design, you must decide what will provide that sense of progress: 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME CONCEPTS 
77
 CHAPTER 3
levels, a story, or both. Will your game be so large that it should be divided into lev-
els? Will your levels be unrelated, and all available to the player at any time, or will 
they be organized into a sequential or branching conﬁ guration, in which complet-
ing a level makes the next one available? What types of conditions will determine 
when a player has completed a level? The genre that you have chosen will help you 
to determine your answers.
The other question is whether you want a story. Stories give games a context and a 
goal. Some genres, such as sports and puzzle games, don’t usually include stories 
because their context is self-explanatory. In other genres, such as role-playing 
and adventure games, the story is a large part of the game’s entertainment. 
Representational games frequently have a story; abstract games generally don’t, 
although Ms. Pac-Man was an exception in a small way. Stories about abstract char-
acters are seldom very involving.
If you do choose to have a story in your game, you don’t have to know exactly what 
narrative content you want to include at the concept-formation stage. All you need 
to know is whether you want a story and, if so, what its overall direction will be. 
You should be able to summarize it in a sentence or two; for example: “Jack Jones, 
leader of a secret anti-drug task force, will conduct a series of raids against the drug 
barons, ending in an apocalyptic battle in the cocaine ﬁ elds of Colombia. Along 
the way, some of the people he encounters will not be quite what they seem.” 
Errors in the storyline are much easier to correct than errors in the gameplay, and 
gamers will forgive story errors more quickly as well. Make sure you understand 
your game ﬁ rst; then build your story into it.
DESIGN RULE The Story Comes Later
Do not spend a lot of time devising a story at the concept stage. This is a cardinal error 
frequently made by people who are more used to presentational media such as books and 
ﬁ lm. You must concentrate most of your efforts on the gameplay at this point.
Types of Game Machines
When you ﬁ rst start ﬂ eshing out your game concept, you should concentrate
on the dream, the player’s role, and the target audience. However, a game concept 
is not complete without a statement about which machine (or machines) the game 
runs on. Some genres of games are better suited to one kind of machine than 
another, and all machines have features and performance characteristics—input
and output devices, processor speed, storage space—that deﬁ ne the scope of the 
game. You need to know the strengths and weaknesses of the different types of 
machines and how their owners use them.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

78
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Throughout this book you’ll see many references to PCs—personal computers. The 
IBM PC and its clones, running the Windows operating system, are by far the most 
popular personal computers for gaming. However, when you see the term PC, you 
shouldn’t assume that it only means IBM PC clones running Windows. Developers 
also make games for the Macintosh and for machines running the Linux operating 
system, and these qualify as PCs too.
Home Game Consoles
A home game console is usually set up in the living room or a bedroom. The player 
sits or stands holding a dedicated controller 3 to 6 feet away from the television 
that serves as its display. Although modern high deﬁ nition digital televisions are a 
great improvement over the analog sets that the early consoles used, the player is 
still too far from the screen to see small details or to read ﬁ ne print conveniently. 
This means that games designed for the home console machine are seldom as intri-
cate as the typical personal computer game. The graphics have to be simpler and 
bolder, and the control method and user interface must be manageable with the 
controller provided. A mouse can point much more precisely than most controllers, 
even ones with analog joysticks. Still, you are guaranteed that every machine ships 
with a standardized controller, which means you don’t have to do the large amount 
of conﬁ guration testing that games for the PC require.
Because several people see the television at once, and because all consoles allow for 
at least two controllers, console machines are excellent for multiplayer games in 
which all the players look at the same screen. This means that every player can see 
what every other player is doing on the screen, which is something you need to 
consider when designing some games. 
Nothing has changed the home console landscape more in the last few years than 
the arrival of the Nintendo Wii, with its revolutionary motion-sensitive controller. 
Many casual players ﬁ nd the vast array of buttons and joysticks on the traditional 
game controller daunting. The Wii has made video games intuitive and easy to 
learn, with the result that Wii machines are being used in all sorts of unexpected 
ways—as therapy for injured, disabled, and elderly people, for example.
Generally speaking, hardware developers create a much larger variety of input 
devices for console machines, such as the Guitar Hero controller, than they do for the 
PC. Because the console manufacturers rigorously test any device with their logo on 
it, you can be conﬁ dent that these devices are compatible with their machines. PC 
manufacturers cannot prevent third parties from creating additional hardware for 
their machines, so you cannot be as conﬁ dent that off-brand input devices will 
work correctly with your PC game—you will simply have to test them.  Chapter 8, 
“User Interfaces,” addresses designing for a variety of controllers in more detail.
Home consoles tend to have graphics display hardware of comparable power to the 
graphics hardware in personal computers but slower central processing units and 
less RAM than personal computers. Because consoles sell for $200–$400 once they 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME CONCEPTS 
79
 CHAPTER 3
have been available for a year or so, the manufacturer has to cut the hardware design 
to the bone to keep the cost down. This means that, as computing devices, the most
expensive console is always less powerful than the most expensive personal computer,
and more difﬁ cult to program. On the other hand, their low price means that far 
more consoles are in players’ hands, which creates a larger market for their games.
The home console differs from the personal computer in another important way. 
Console manufacturers won’t let just anyone make a game for their machine. You 
have to have a license from the manufacturer and their approval for your game 
idea—and they tend to be reluctant to approve anything controversial. Once the 
game is ready, you also have to submit it to the manufacturer for extensive testing 
before releasing it. Nintendo instituted these policies after the video game industry 
was nearly destroyed in the early 1980s by a ﬂ ood of low-quality, buggy games 
(mostly made for the Atari VCS console). Nowadays, all the console manufacturers 
have policies similar to Nintendo’s. When developing for personal computers, you 
aren’t constrained this way. You can create any game you want, without anyone’s 
permission, on any subject you like. Obviously some publishers won’t publish 
games that they feel might be offensive, and many countries have censorship laws 
that explicitly prohibit certain content. But the PC is an open platform; you can 
build games for personal computers without being bound by any contractual 
limitations.
In the last few years, a partial convergence has taken place between the home con-
sole and the PC. Consoles now routinely include hard disk drives that enable the 
player to store far more data than before, and they all include networking capabil-
ity as well. Services such as Xbox LIVE have begun to network console machines, 
although this is not yet the standard way that people play. The single-player or 
multiplayer local experience is still the most common one.
Personal Computers
A personal computer (PC) can be set up away from the communal living space, on 
a computer desk. In this case, the player has a keyboard, a mouse, possibly a joy-
stick, and (more rarely) a dedicated game controller such as those on console 
machines. The player sits 12 to 18 inches away from a relatively small (compared to 
the television) high-resolution display. The high resolution means that the game 
can have subtle, detailed graphics. The mouse allows precision pointing and a more 
complex user interface. The keyboard enables the player to enter text conveniently 
and send messages to other players over a network, something that is nearly impos-
sible with console machines.
The personal computer is quite awkward for more than one person to use. The con-
trols of a PC are all designed for one individual, and even the furniture it usually 
sits on—a desk—is intended for solitary use. PC games are rarely designed for more 
than one person to play on a single machine. On the other hand, a PC is very likely 
to be connected to the Internet, whereas consoles only recently got this capability. 
The PC is still the machine of choice for multiplayer networked games.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

80 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
The great boon of PC development is that anyone can program one; you don’t have 
to get a license from the manufacturer or buy an expensive development station. 
Consequently, personal computers are at the cutting edge of innovation in com-
puter gaming. They’re the platform of choice for small-scale, low-demand projects, 
interactive art, and other experimental forms of interactive entertainment.
The great bane of PC development is that no two machines are alike. Because 
they’re customizable, millions of conﬁ gurations are possible. In the early days of 
the game industry, this was a real nightmare for programmers. Fortunately, the 
Windows and Macintosh operating systems have solved many of these problems by 
isolating the programs from the hardware. Still, games tend to require more from 
the machine than other applications do, and conﬁ guration conﬂ icts still occur.
PC games may be divided into two general and quite different categories: stand-
alone games, which the player installs on his machine like any other program, and 
browser-based games that run inside a web browser such as Safari or Internet Explorer.
STAND-ALONE GAMES
A stand-alone PC game can use the full power of the PC, assuming the player isn’t 
running any other applications at the same time. Of all games played on consumer 
equipment, stand-alone PC games can be the most visually spectacular. Home 
game consoles are sold in distinct hardware “generations,” and a given manufactur-
er’s machine won’t change until the next generation. By contrast, personal 
computers evolve constantly, so game developers can take advantage of the latest 
hardware innovations. Crytek’s Crysis is a good example of a game that requires a 
very powerful machine for a player to enjoy it fully. 
This doesn’t mean that stand-alone PC games always demand high-end equipment, 
or that they should; it only means that if you want to develop for the highest-end 
gear, you should build stand-alone PC games. That choice usually limits the size of 
your market to the truly dedicated hobbyist gamer. On the other hand, many 
stand-alone games are aimed at the middle of the range and do very well. Most 
edutainment games are stand-alone games because it’s easier for a parent to help a 
young child with a keyboard and mouse than a handheld controller.
BROWSER-BASED GAMES
Browser-based games are a rapidly growing sector of the game market. They have 
one huge advantage over stand-alone games: Because they run in a web browser, 
they are isolated from the machine’s hardware. A browser-based game can run on a 
Windows PC, Macintosh, or Linux machine with no modiﬁ cations. This advantage 
comes at a price, however; browser-based games cannot take full advantage of 
the machine’s capabilities, and this usually includes 3D rendering. Most browser-
based games—and there are thousands—are 2D games aimed at the casual player. 
They are often written in Java or Adobe’s ActionScript language, which works with 
Flash Player.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME CONCEPTS 
81
 CHAPTER 3
Beginning with browser-based games is an excellent way to get started building 
small games, because you don’t have to know much about the machine’s hardware.
Handheld Game Machines
Handheld game machines are a hugely popular and very inexpensive form of enter-
tainment, used in the West mainly by children. (In Japan, signiﬁ cant numbers of 
adults use them too.) Handhelds support few add-on features; the input and output 
devices are usually ﬁ xed. These machines have a smaller number of buttons than a 
console controller does and only a small LCD screen. Their CPUs are slower than 
their console counterparts but still have enough CPU speed to run sophisticated 
games. The Sony PSP represented a huge jump in the power and display quality of 
handheld game machines.
The cheapest handheld machines offer a ﬁ xed set of built-in games, but the more 
versatile handhelds accept games stored on ROM cartridges, and the PSP now sup-
ports a small optical disk. Cartridges store much less data than the CD-ROMs or 
DVD discs that home consoles and computers use. Designing for a cartridge 
machine places severe limits on the amount of video, audio, graphics, and anima-
tion you can include in the game. Because they’re solid-state electronics, though, 
the data on a cartridge is available instantly. There’s no delay in loading data, as 
there is with optical media devices.
The handheld game market is potentially lucrative, but creating a game for one 
tests your skills as a designer. With less storage space, you have to rely on gameplay 
rather than content to provide the entertainment. And as with home console 
machines, to develop for handheld game machines you must have a license from 
the manufacturer. (The Pocket PC and other personal digital assistants belong to a 
different category because they are not, strictly speaking, game machines. The later 
section “Other Devices” deals with them.)
Mobile Phones and Wireless Devices
Mobile phones now have enough computing power to play decent games. 
Unfortunately, it has proven difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd a reliably proﬁ table business model. 
The public is reluctant to pay much money for games on mobile phones. Skins and 
ringtones account for most of the money being made in mobile phone content at 
the moment. But the worst thing about developing for mobile phones is the utter 
lack of standardization. The screens are all different sizes and color depths; the pro-
cessors are different; the operating systems are different. Even the layout of the 
buttons is nonstandard, making it difﬁ cult to be certain what user interface design 
is convenient across a range of phones.
However, mobile phones and other wireless devices such as the Nintendo DS do 
have one distinct advantage over traditional game handhelds: Wireless devices per-
mit portable networked play. Players can compete against other people while riding 
on trains or waiting for an appointment. Setting up a networked game on mobile 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

