GAME CONCEPTS 
83
 CHAPTER 3
3. Certain genres are more often found on one kind of machine than on another. 
Write an essay explaining which machine each genre works best on and why. How 
do the machine’s features and the way that it is used in the home facilitate or hin-
der the gameplay in each genre?
Design Practice QUESTIONS
Once you have a game idea in mind, these are the questions you must ask yourself 
in order to turn it into a fully ﬂ edged game concept. You don’t have to be precise or 
detailed, but you should have a general answer for all of them.
1. Write a high concept statement: a few sentences that give a general ﬂ avor of the 
game. You can make references to other games, movies, books, or any other media 
if your game contains similar characters, actions, or ideas.
2. What is the player’s role? Is the player pretending to be someone or something, 
and if so, what? Is there more than one? How does the player’s role help to deﬁ ne 
the gameplay?
3. Does the game have an avatar or other key character? Describe him/her/it.
4. What is the nature of the gameplay, in general terms? What kinds of challenges 
will the player face? What kinds of actions will the player take to overcome them?
5. What is the player’s interaction model? Omnipresent? Through an avatar? 
Something else? Some combination?
6. What is the game’s primary camera model? How will the player view the game’s 
world on the screen? Will there be more than one perspective?
7. Does the game fall into an existing genre? If so, which one?
8. Is the game competitive, cooperative, team-based, or single-player? If multiple 
players are allowed, are they using the same machine with separate controls or dif-
ferent machines over a network?
9. Why would anyone want to play this game? Who is the game’s target audience? 
What characteristics distinguish them from the mass of players in general?
10. What machine or machines is the game intended to run on? Can it make use of, 
or will it require, any particular hardware such as dance mats or a camera?
11. What is the game’s setting? Where does it take place?
12. Will the game be broken into levels? What might be the victory condition for a 
typical level?
13. Does the game have a narrative or story as it goes along? Summarize the plot in 
a sentence or two.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Game Worlds
Games entertain through gameplay, but many also entertain by taking the player 
away to an imaginary place—a game world. (This book uses the terms world, setting,
and game setting interchangeably with game world.) In fact, the gameplay in most 
single-player video games appears to the player as interactions between himself and 
the game world. This chapter deﬁ nes a game world and introduces the various 
dimensions that describe a game world: the physical, temporal, environmental, 
emotional, and ethical dimensions, as well as a quality called realism.
What Is a Game World?
A game world is an artiﬁ cial universe, an imaginary place in which the events of 
the game occur. When the player enters the magic circle and pretends to be some-
where else, the game world is the place she pretends to be.
Not all games have a game world. A football game takes place in a real location, not 
an imaginary one. Playing football still requires pretending because the players 
assign an artiﬁ cial importance to otherwise trivial actions, but the pretending 
doesn’t create a game world. Many abstract games, such as tic-tac-toe, have a board 
but not a world—there is no imaginary element in playing the game. Chess has 
only a hint of a world; although the board and the moves are abstract, the names of 
the pieces suggest a medieval court with its king and queen, knights and bishops. 
Stratego has a slightly more elaborate world: The board is printed to look like a land-
scape, and the pieces are illustrated with little pictures, encouraging us to pretend 
that they are colonels, sergeants, and scouts in an army. Stratego could be played 
entirely abstractly, using only numbers and a bare grid for a board, but the setting 
makes it more interesting.
ART IS NOT ENOUGH
When deﬁ ning your game world, it will be tempting to start drawing pictures right away, 
especially if you’re artistically inclined anyway. That’s good in the early stages of design; 
you will need concept art to pitch your game. But don’t make the mistake of thinking that 
nice drawings are enough. Your game world must support and work with the core 
mechanics and gameplay of your game. To make the world serve the game well, you 
must design it carefully. Otherwise you may forget to address an important issue until 
late in the development process, when it’s expensive to make changes. 
CHAPTER 4
84


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME WORLDS 
85
 CHAPTER 4
Most video games present their game world with pictures and sound: art, anima-
tion, music, and audio effects. Not all game worlds have a visible or audible 
component, however. In a text adventure, the player creates the images and sounds 
of the world in his imagination when he reads the text on the screen. Designing 
such a world is a matter of using your literary skills to describe it in words.
Game worlds are much more than the sum of the pictures and sounds that portray 
them. A game world can have a culture, an aesthetic, a set of moral values, and 
other dimensions that you’ll look at in this chapter. The game world also has a rela-
tionship to reality, whether it is highly abstract, with little connection to the world 
of everyday things, or highly representational, attempting to be as similar to the 
real world as possible.
The Purposes of a Game World
Games entertain by several means: gameplay, novelty, social interaction (if it is a 
multiplayer game), and so on. In a game such as chess, almost all the entertain-
ment value is in the gameplay; few people think of it as a game about medieval 
warfare. In an adventure game such as Escape from Monkey Island, the world is 
essential to the fantasy. Without the world, Escape from Monkey Island would not 
exist, and if it had a different world, it would be a different game. One of the pur-
poses of a game world is simply to entertain in its own right: to offer the player a 
place to explore and an environment to interact with.
As a general rule, the more that a player understands a game’s core mechanics, the 
less the game world matters. Mastering the core mechanics requires a kind of 
abstract thought, and fantasy can be a distraction. Serious chess players don’t think 
of the pieces as representing actual kings and queens and knights. When players 
become highly skilled at a game such as Counter-Strike, they no longer think that 
they’re pretending to be soldiers or terrorists; they think only about hiding, mov-
ing, shooting, ambushing, obtaining ammunition, and so on. However, this kind 
of abstract play, ignoring a game’s world, usually occurs only among experienced 
players. To someone who’s playing a game for the ﬁ rst time, the world is vital to 
creating and sustaining her interest.
The other purpose of a game’s world is to sell the game in the ﬁ rst place. It’s not the 
game’s mechanics that make a customer pick up a box in a store but the fantasy it 
offers: who she’ll be, where she’ll be, and what she’ll be doing there if she plays 
that game.
The Dimensions of a Game World
Many different properties deﬁ ne a game’s world. Some, such as the size of the 
world, are quantitative and can be given numerical values. Others, such as the 
world’s mood, are qualitative and can only be described with words. Certain 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

86 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
properties are related to one another, and these groups of related properties are the 
dimensions of the game world. To fully deﬁ ne your world and its setting, you need 
to consider each of these dimensions and answer certain questions about them.
The Physical Dimension
Video game worlds are almost always implemented as some sort of simulated physi-
cal space. The player moves his avatar in and around this space or manipulates 
other pieces or characters in it. The physical properties of this space determine a 
great deal about the gameplay.
Even text adventures include a physical dimension. The player moves from one 
abstract location, usually called a room even if it’s described as outdoors, to another. 
Back when more people played text adventures, the boxes the games came in used 
to carry proud boasts about the number of rooms in the game. Gamers could take 
this as a very rough measure of the size of the world they could explore in the game 
and, therefore, the amount of gameplay that the game offered.
The physical dimension of a game is itself characterized by several different proper-
ties: spatial dimensionality, scale, and boundaries.
SPATIAL DIMENSIONALITY
One of the ﬁ rst questions to ask yourself is how many spatial dimensions your 
physical space will have. It is essential to understand that the dimensionality of
the game’s physical space is not the same as how the game displays that space (the 
camera model) or how it implements the space in the software. How to implement 
the space and how to display it are separate but related questions. The former has
to do with technical design, and the latter has to do with user interface design. 
Ultimately, all spaces must be displayed on the two-dimensional surface of the 
monitor screen.
These are the typical dimensionalities found in video games:
■ 2D. A few years ago, the vast majority of games had only two dimensions. This 
was especially noticeable in 2D side-scrolling games such as Super Mario Bros. (see 
Figure 4.1). Mario could run left and right and jump up and down, but he could 
not move toward the player (out of the screen) or away from him (into the screen). 
Two-dimensional worlds have one huge advantage when you’re thinking about 
how to display them: The two dimensions of the world directly correspond to the 
two dimensions of the monitor screen, so you don’t have to worry about conveying 
a sense of depth to the player. On the other hand, a number of games with 2D 
game worlds still use 3D hardware accelerators for display so that objects appear 
three-dimensional even though the gameplay does not use the third dimension. 
Two-dimensional worlds may seem rather old-fashioned nowadays, but there are 
still many uses for them in casual browser-based games and smaller devices such as 
low-end mobile phones.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME WORLDS 
87
 CHAPTER 4
■ 2.5D, typically pronounced “two-and-a-half D.” This refers to game worlds that 
appear to be a three-dimensional space but in reality consist of a series of 2D layers, 
one above the other. StarCraft, a war game, shows plateaus and lowlands, as well as 
aircraft that pass over obstacles and ground units. The player can place objects and 
move them horizontally within a layer with a ﬁ ne degree of precision, but vertically 
an object must be in one plane or another; there is no in-between. Flying objects can’t 
move up and down in the air; they’re simply in the air layer as Figure 4.2 depicts.
FIGURE 4.2
StarCraft, with 
plateaus and 
lowlands visible
FIGURE 4.1
Super Mario Bros.,
the classic 2D side-
scrolling game


--- PAGE BREAK ---

88 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ 3D. Three true dimensions. Thanks to 3D hardware accelerators and modeling 
tools, 3D spaces are now easy to implement on hardware that supports them. They 
give the player a much greater sense of being inside a space (building, cave, space-
craft, or whatever) than 2D spaces ever can. With a 2D world, the player feels as if 
he is looking at it; with a 3D world, he feels as if he is in it. 3D worlds are great for 
avatar-based games with exploration challenges, such as the Prince of Persia series 
(see Figure 4.3). Most large games for personal computers and consoles now use 
three dimensions, but many small casual games still need only two.
■ 4D. If you want to include a fourth dimension for some reason (not counting 
time), implement it as an alternate version of the 3D game world rather than
an actual four-dimensional space. In other words, create two (or more) three-
dimensional spaces that look similar but offer different experiences as the avatar 
moves among them. For example, the Legacy of Kain series presents two versions
of the same 3D world, the spectral realm and the material realm, with different 
gameplay modes for each. The landscape is the same in both, but the material 
realm is lit by white light while the spectral realm is lit by blue light, and the archi-
tecture is distorted in the spiritual realm (see Figure 4.4). The actions available to 
the player are different in each realm. The realms look similar but are functionally 
different places governed by different laws. In the movie version of The Lord of the 
Rings, the world that Frodo inhabits while he is wearing the Ring can be thought
of as an alternate plane of reality as well, overlapping the real world but appearing 
and behaving differently.
FIGURE 4.3
Prince of Persia, a fully 
3D environment


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME WORLDS 
89
 CHAPTER 4
When you ﬁ rst think about the dimensionality of your game space, don’t immedi-
ately assume that you want it to be three-dimensional because 3D seems more real 
or makes the best use of your machine’s hardware. As with everything else you 
design, the dimensionality of your physical space must serve the entertainment 
value of the game. Make sure all the dimensions will contribute meaningfully. 
Many games that work extremely well in two dimensions don’t work well in three. 
Lemmings was a hit 2D game, but Lemmings 3D was nowhere near as successful 
because it was much more difﬁ cult to play. The addition of a third dimension 
detracted from the player’s enjoyment rather than added to it.
SCALE
Scale refers to both the absolute size of the physical space represented, as measured 
in units meaningful in the game world (meters, miles, or light-years, for instance) 
and the relative sizes of objects in the game. If a game is purely abstract and doesn’t 
correspond to anything in the real world, the sizes of objects in its game world 
don’t really matter. You can adjust them to suit the game’s needs any way you like. 
But if you are designing a game that represents (if only partially) the real world, 
you’ll have to address the question of how big everything should be to both look 
real and play well. Some distortion is often necessary for the sake of gameplay, 
especially in war games; the trick is to distort the scale without harming the play-
er’s suspension of disbelief too much.
In a sports game, a driving game, a ﬂ ight simulator, or any other kind of game in 
which the player expects a high degree of verisimilitude, you have little choice but 
to scale things to their actual sizes. In old 2D sports games, it was not uncommon 
for the athletes to be depicted as 12 feet tall to make them more visible, but nowa-
days players don’t tolerate a game taking such liberties with reality. Serious 
simulations need to represent the physical world accurately.
Similarly, you should scale most of the objects in ﬁ rst-person games accurately. 
Fortunately, almost all ﬁ rst-person games are set indoors or within limited areas, 
seldom larger than a few hundred feet in any dimension, so this doesn’t create 
implementation problems. Because the player’s perspective is that of a person 
FIGURE 4.4
Legacy of Kain: Soul 
Reaver’s material (left) 
and spiritual (right) 
realms. Notice how the 
walls are slightly 
twisted in the spiritual 
realm and the overlay 
indicator is different. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

90 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
walking through the space, objects need to look right for their surrounding area. 
You might want to slightly exaggerate the size of critical objects such as keys, weap-
ons, or ammunition to make them more visible, but most things, such as doors and 
furniture, should be scaled normally.
If you’re designing a game with an aerial or isometric perspective, you might need 
to distort the scale of things somewhat. The real world is so much larger and more 
detailed than a game world that it’s impossible to represent objects in their true 
scale in such a perspective. For example, in modern mechanized warfare, ground 
battles can easily take place over a 20-mile front, with weapons that can ﬁ re that 
far or farther. If you were to map an area this size onto a computer screen, an indi-
vidual soldier or even a tank would be smaller than a single pixel, completely 
invisible. Although the display will normally be zoomed in on one small area of 
the whole map, the scale of objects will have to be somewhat exaggerated so that 
the objects are clearly identiﬁ able on the screen.
Games frequently distort the relative heights of people and the buildings or hills in 
their environment. The buildings are often only a little taller than the people who 
walk past them. (See Figure 4.5 for an example.) To be able to see the roofs of all 
the buildings or the tops of all the hills, the camera must be positioned above the 
highest point in the world. But if the camera is positioned too high, the people are 
hardly visible at all. To solve this problem, the game simply does not include tall 
buildings or hills and exaggerates the height of the people. Because the vertical 
dimension is seldom critical to the gameplay in products such as war games and 
role-playing games, it doesn’t matter if heights are not accurate, as long as they’re 
not so inaccurate as to interfere with suspension of disbelief.
Designers often make another scale distortion between indoor and outdoor loca-
tions. When a character walks through a town, simply going from one place to 
another, the player wants the character to get there reasonably quickly. The scale of 
the town should be small enough that the character takes only a few minutes to get 
from one end to another unless the point of the game is to explore a richly detailed 
urban environment. When the character steps inside a building, however, and 
needs to negotiate doors and furniture, you should expand the scale to show these 
additional details. If you use the same animation for a character walking indoors 
and outdoors, this will give the impression that the character walks much faster 
outdoors than indoors. However, this seldom bothers players—they’d much rather 
have the game proceed quickly than have their avatar take hours to get anywhere, 
even if that would be more accurate.
This brings up one ﬁ nal distortion, which is also affected by the game’s notion of 
time (see the section “The Temporal Dimension” later in this chapter), and that is 
the relative speeds of moving objects. In the real world, a supersonic jet ﬁ ghter can 
ﬂ y more than a hundred times faster than an infantry soldier can walk on the 
ground. If you’re designing a game that includes both infantry soldiers and jet 
ﬁ ghters, you’re going to have a problem. If the scale of the battleﬁ eld is suitable for 
jets, it will take infantry weeks to walk across; if it’s suitable for infantry, a jet could 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME WORLDS 
91
 CHAPTER 4
pass over it in the blink of an eye. One solution is to do what the real military does 
and implement transport vehicles for ground troops. Another is simply to accept a 
certain amount of distortion and create jets that ﬂ y only four or ﬁ ve times as fast as 
people walk (StarCraft uses this trick). As long as the jet is the fastest thing in the 
game, it doesn’t really matter how much faster it is; the strike-and-retreat tactic that 
jets are good at will still work. Setting these values is all part of balancing the game, 
as Chapter 9, “Gameplay,” discusses in more detail.
BOUNDARIES
In board games, the edge of the board is the edge of the game world. Because com-
puters don’t have inﬁ nite memories, the physical dimension of a computer game 
world must have an “edge” as well. However, computer games are usually more 
immersive than board games, and they often try to disguise or explain away the 
fact that the world is limited to help maintain the player’s immersion.
In some cases, the boundaries of a game world arise naturally, and we don’t have
to disguise or explain them. Sports games take place only in a stadium or an arena, 
and no one expects or wants them to include the larger world. In most driving 
games, the car is restricted to a track or a road, and this, too, is reasonable enough.
Setting a game underground or indoors helps to create natural boundaries for the 
game world. Everyone expects indoor regions to be of a limited size, with walls 
FIGURE 4.5
In Age of Empires, the 
buildings are only a 
little taller than the 
people. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

92 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
deﬁ ning the edges. The problem occurs when games move outdoors, where players 
expect large, open spaces without sharply deﬁ ned edges. A common solution in 
this case is to set the game on an island surrounded by water or by some other kind 
of impassable terrain: mountains, swamps, or deserts. These establish both a credi-
ble and a visually distinctive “edge of the world.”
In ﬂ ight simulators, setting the boundaries of the world creates even more prob-
lems. Most ﬂ ight simulators restrict the player to a particular area of the real world. 
Because there are no walls in the air, there’s nothing to stop the plane from ﬂ ying 
up to the edge of the game world; when the player arrives there he can clearly see 
that there’s nothing beyond. In some games, the plane just stops there, hovering in 
midair, and won’t go any farther. In Battleﬁ eld 1942, the game tells the player that 
he has left the scene of the action and forcibly returns him to the runway.
A common solution to the edge-of-the-world problem is to allow the ﬂ at world to 
“wrap” at the top, bottom, and sides. Although the world is implemented as a rect-
angular space in the software, objects that cross one edge appear at the opposite 
edge—they wrap around the world. If the object remains centered on the screen 
and the world appears to move beneath it, you can create the impression that the 
world is spherical. This is used to excellent effect in Bullfrog Productions’ game 
Magic Carpet. Maxis’s Spore actually displays the world as a sphere on the screen,
not just a wrapping rectangle (see Figure 4.6).
FIGURE 4.6
Parts of Spore are set 
on a genuinely spheri-
cal world. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME WORLDS 
93
 CHAPTER 4
Finally, you can solve the problem of boundaries by requiring the player to move 
among deﬁ ned locations. For example, you might let a player ﬂ y from planet to 
planet in the solar system by clicking on the planet she wants to go to. The player 
cannot go beyond the boundary of the solar system because there are no planets in 
interstellar space. The user interface for movement creates a natural limit that 
requires no further explanation.
The Temporal Dimension
The temporal dimension of a game world deﬁ nes the way that time is treated in that 
world and the ways in which it differs from time in the real world.
In many turn-based and action games, the world doesn’t include a concept of
time passing: days and nights or seasons and years. Everything in the world idles
or runs in a continuous loop until the player interacts with the game in some way. 
Occasionally, the player is put under pressure by being given a limited amount of 
real-world time to accomplish something, but this usually applies to only a single 
challenge and is not part of a larger notion of time in the game.
In some games, time is implemented as part of the game world but not part of the 
gameplay. The passage of time creates atmosphere and gives the game visual vari-
ety, but it doesn’t change the game’s challenges and actions. This usually feels 
rather artiﬁ cial. If the player can do exactly the same things at night that she can 
during the day and no one ever seems to sleep, then there’s little point in making 
the distinction. For time to really support the fantasy, it must affect the experience 
in ways besides the purely visual.
Baldur’s Gate, a large role-playing game, is a good example of a game in which
time is meaningful. At night, shops close and the characters in the game run an 
increased risk of being attacked by wandering monsters. It’s also darker and hard
to see. Taverns are open all day and all night, which is reasonable enough, but the 
customers don’t ever seem to leave and the bartender never goes off shift. In this 
way, the game’s use of time is a little inconsistent, but the discrepancy serves the 
gameplay well because you can always trade with the bartender and pick up gossip 
no matter what time it is. The characters do need rest if they’ve been on the march 
for a long while, and this makes them vulnerable while they’re sleeping. In the 
underground portions of the game, day and night have less meaning, as you would 
expect.
VARIABLE TIME
In games that do implement time as a signiﬁ cant element of the gameplay, time in 
the game world usually runs much faster than in reality. Time in games also jumps 
(as it does in books and movies), skipping periods when nothing interesting is hap-
pening. Most war games, for example, don’t bother to implement nighttime or 
require that soldiers get any rest. In reality, soldier fatigue is a critical consideration 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

94 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
in warfare, but because sleeping soldiers don’t make exciting viewing and certainly 
aren’t very interactive, most games just skip sleep periods. Allowing soldiers to ﬁ ght 
continuously without a pause permits the player to play continuously without a 
pause also.
The Sims, a game about managing a household, handles this problem a different 
way. The simulated characters require rest and sleep for their health, so The Sims
depicts day and night accurately. However, when all the characters go to sleep, the 
game speeds up considerably, letting hours go by in a few seconds. As soon as any-
one wakes up, time slows down again.
The Sims is a rather unusual game in that it’s chieﬂ y about time management. The 
player is under constant pressure to have his characters accomplish all their chores 
and get time for sleep, relaxation, and personal development as well. The game 
runs something like 48 times as fast as real life, so it takes about 20 minutes of real 
time to play through the 16 hours of game-world daytime. However, the characters 
don’t move 48 times as fast. Their actions look pretty normal, about as they would 
in real time. As a result, it takes them 15 minutes according to the game’s clock just 
to go out and pick up the newspaper. This contributes to the sense of time pressure. 
Because the characters do everything slowly (in game terms), they often don’t get a 
chance to water their ﬂ owers, which consequently die.
ANOMALOUS TIME
In The Settlers: Rise of an Empire, a complex economic simulation, a tree can grow 
from a sapling to full size in about the same length of time that it takes for an iron 
foundry to smelt four or ﬁ ve bars of iron. This is a good example of anomalous 
time: time that seems to move at different speeds in different parts of the game. 
Blue Byte, the developer of The Settlers, tuned the length of time it takes to do each 
of the many tasks in the game to make sure that the game as a whole would run 
smoothly. As a result, The Settlers is very well balanced at some cost to realism. 
However, it doesn’t disrupt the fantasy because The Settlers doesn’t actually give the 
player a clock in the game world. There’s no way to compare game time to real 
time, so in effect, the game world has no obvious time scale (see Figure 4.7).
Another example of anomalous time appears in Age of Empires, in which tasks that 
should take less than a day in real time (gathering berries from a bush, for example) 
seem to take years in game time according to the game clock. Age of Empires does 
have a time scale, visible on the game clock, but not everything in the world makes 
sense on that time scale. The players simply have to accept these actions as sym-
bolic rather than real. As designers, we have to make them work in the context of 
the game world without disrupting the fantasy. As long as the symbolic actions 
(gathering berries or growing trees) don’t have to be coordinated with real-time 
actions (warfare) but remain essentially independent processes, it doesn’t matter
if they operate on an anomalous time scale.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME WORLDS 
95
 CHAPTER 4
LETTING THE PLAYER ADJUST TIME
In sports games and vehicle simulations, game time usually runs at the same speed 
as real time. An American football game is, by deﬁ nition, an hour long, but because 
the clock stops all the time, the actual elapsed time of a football game is closer to 
three hours. All serious computerized football games simulate this accurately. 
Verisimilitude is a key requirement of most sports games; if a game does not
accurately simulate the real sport, the league might not approve of it, and its com-
petitors are bound to point out the ﬂ aw. However, most such games also allow the 
players to shorten the game by playing 5- or 10-minute quarters instead of 15-minute
quarters because most people don’t want to devote a full three hours to playing a 
simulated football game. This is also a useful feature in testing; it takes far too long 
to test the product if you have to play a full-length game every time.
Flight simulators also usually run in real time, but there are often long periods of 
ﬂ ying straight and level during which nothing of interest is going on; the plane is 
simply traveling from one place to another. To shorten these periods, many games 
offer a way to speed up time in the game world by two, four, or eight times—in 
effect, make everything in the game world go faster than real time. When the plane 
approaches its destination, the player can return the game to normal speed and 
play in real time.
FIGURE 4.7
Activities in The 
Settlers: Rise of an 
Empire take anomalous 
lengths of time, but the 
user interface does not 
include a clock.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

96 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
The Environmental Dimension
The environmental dimension describes the world’s appearance and its atmosphere.
You’ve seen that the physical dimension deﬁ nes the properties of the game’s space; 
the environmental dimension is about what’s in that space. The environmental 
characteristics of the game world form the basis for creating its art and audio. We’ll 
look at two particular properties: the cultural context of the world and the physical 
surroundings.
CULTURAL CONTEXT
The cultural context of a game refers to its culture in the anthropological sense:
the beliefs, attitudes, and values that the people in the game world hold, as well as 
their political and religious institutions, social organization, and so on—in short, 
the way those people live. These characteristics are reﬂ ected in the manufactured 
items that appear in the game: clothing, furniture, architecture, landscaping, and 
every other man-made object in the world. The culture inﬂ uences not only what 
appears and what doesn’t appear (a game set in a realistic ancient Egypt obviously 
shouldn’t include ﬁ rearms), but also how everything looks—including the user 
interface. Cleopatra: Queen of the Nile is an excellent example of a game’s culture 
harmonizing with its user interface; see Figure 4.8. The way objects appear is 
affected not only by their function in the world, but also by the aesthetic sensibili-
ties of the people who constructed them; for example, a Maori shield looks entirely 
different from a medieval European shield.
FIGURE 4.8
The cultural context of 
Cleopatra: Queen of the 
Nile inﬂ uences every-
thing on the screen, 
including the icons and 
text. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME WORLDS 
97
 CHAPTER 4
The cultural context also includes the game’s backstory. The backstory of a game is 
the imaginary history, either large-scale (nations, wars, natural disasters) or small-
scale (personal events and interactions), that preceded the time when the game 
takes place. This prior history helps to establish why the culture is the way it is. A 
warlike people should have a history of warfare; a mercantile people should have a 
history of trading. In designing the backstory, don’t go into too much depth too 
early, however. As Chapter 3, “Game Concepts,” warned, the story must serve the 
game, not the other way around.
For most game worlds, it’s not necessary to deﬁ ne the culture or cultures in great 
detail. A game set in your own culture can simply use the things that you see 
around you. The SimCity series, for example, is clearly set in present-day America 
(European cities are rarely so rectilinear), and it looks like it. But when your game 
begins to deviate from your own culture, you need to start thinking about how it 
deviates and what consequences that deviation has.
PHYSICAL SURROUNDINGS
The physical surroundings deﬁ ne what the game actually looks like. This is a part 
of game design in which it’s most helpful to be an artist or to work closely with 
one. In the early stages of design, you don’t need to make drawings of every single 
thing that can appear in the game world (although sooner or later someone will to 
have to do just that). For the time being, it’s important to create concept sketches: 
pencil or pen-and-ink drawings of key visual elements in the game. Depending on 
what your game is about, this can include buildings, vehicles, clothing, weaponry, 
furniture, decorations, works of art, jewelry, religious or magical items, logos or 
emblems, and on and on. See Grim Fandango (Figure 4.9) for a particularly distinc-
tive example. The game’s culture inﬂ uences constructed artifacts in particular. A 
powerful and highly religious people are likely to have large symbols of their spiri-
tuality: stone temples or cathedrals. A warlike nomadic people have animals or 
vehicles to carry their gear and weapons they can use on the move. (Note that 
these might be future nomads, driving robo-camels.)
Nor should you neglect the natural world. Games set in urban or indoor environ-
ments consisting entirely of manufactured objects feel sterile. Think about birds 
and animals, plants and trees, earth, rocks, hills, and even the sky. Consider the 
climate: Is it hot or cold, wet or dry? Is the land fertile or barren, ﬂ at or mountain-
ous? These qualities, all parts of a real place, are opportunities to create a visually 
rich and distinctive environment.
If your world is chieﬂ y indoors, of course, you don’t have to think about nature 
much unless your character passes a window, but there are many other issues to 
think about instead. Where does the light come from? What are the walls, ﬂ oors, 
and ceilings made of, and how are they decorated? Why is this building here? Do 
the rooms have a speciﬁ c purpose, and if so, what? How can you tell the purpose of 
a room from its contents? Does the building have multiple stories? How does the 
player get from one ﬂ oor to another?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

98
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Physical surroundings include sounds as well as sights: music; ambient environ-
mental sounds; the particular noises made by people, animals, machinery, and 
vehicles. If you think about the sounds things make at the same time that you 
think about how they look, this helps you create a coherent world. Suppose you’re 
inventing a six-legged reptilian saddle animal with clawed feet rather than hooves. 
How does that creature sound as it moves? Its scales might rattle a bit. Its feet are 
not going to make the characteristic cilp-clop sound of a shod horse. With six legs, 
it will probably have some rather odd gaits, and those should be reﬂ ected in the 
sound it makes.
The physical surroundings play a big role in setting the tone and mood of the game 
as it is played, whether it’s the lighthearted cheerfulness of Mario or the gritty reali-
ties of the Godfather series (see Figure 4.10). The sound, and especially the music, 
will contribute greatly to this. Think hard about the kind of music you want, and 
consider what genres will be appropriate. Stanley Kubrick listened to hundreds of 
records to select the music for 2001: A Space Odyssey, and he astonished the world 
with his choice of “The Blue Danube” for the shuttle docking sequence. You have a 
similar opportunity when you design your game.
FIGURE 4.9
Grim Fandango com-
bines Aztec, Art Deco, 
and Mexican Day of the 
Dead themes. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME WORLDS 
99
 CHAPTER 4
DETAIL
Every designer must decide how much detail the game world needs—that is to say, 
how richly textured the world will be and how accurately modeled its characteris-
tics will be. To some extent, your answer will be determined by the level of realism 
that you want, but technical limitations and time constraints will necessarily 
restrict your ambitions. No football game goes to the extent of modeling each fan 
in the stadium, and few ﬂ ight simulators model all the physical characteristics of 
their aircraft. Detail helps to support the fantasy, but it always costs, in develop-
ment time and in memory or disk space on the player’s machine. In an adventure 
game, it should, in principle, be possible to pick up everything in the world; in 
practice, this just isn’t practical. As a consequence, the player knows that if he can 
pick up an object, it must be important for some reason; if he can’t pick it up, it 
isn’t important. Similarly, in god games, it’s common for all the people to look 
alike; they’re often male adults. Bullfrog Productions once designed a god game 
with both male and female adults, but there wasn’t enough time for the artists to 
model children as well. People simply were born into the world full grown. 
Lionhead’s Black & White, on the other hand, managed to include men, women, 
and children.
The camera model you choose, and the way that the player moves through the 
world, may inﬂ uence your decisions about the level of detail. For example, in a 
small stadium such as the Wimbledon tennis courts, the athletes may be conscious 
of speciﬁ c people in the crowd, so it makes sense to model them in some detail. In 
motorsports, however, the spectators will ﬂ ash past in a blur, and there’s no point 
in putting much effort into their appearance.
FIGURE 4.10
A shootout in The 
Godfather II


--- PAGE BREAK ---

100 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Here’s a good rule of thumb for determining the level of detail your game will con-
tain: Include as much detail as you can to help the game’s immersiveness, up to the 
point at which it begins to harm the gameplay. If the player must struggle to look 
after everything you’ve given him, the game probably has too much detail. (This
is one of the reasons war games tend to have hundreds rather than hundreds of 
thousands of units. The player in a war game can’t delegate tasks to intelligent sub-
ordinates, so the numbers have to be kept down to a size that he can reasonably 
manage.) A spectacularly detailed game that’s no fun to play doesn’t sell many copies.
DEFINING A STYLE
In describing how your world is going to look, you are deﬁ ning a visual style for 
your game that will inﬂ uence a great many other things as well: the character 
design, the user interface, perhaps the manual, and even the design of the box and 
the advertising. You actually have two tasks to take on here: deﬁ ning the style of 
things in your world (that is, its intrinsic style), and also deﬁ ning the style of the 
artwork that will depict your world. They aren’t the same. For example, you can 
describe a world whose architectural style is inspired by Buddhist temples but draw 
it to look like a ﬁ lm noir movie. Or you could have medieval towns with half-tim-
bered houses but depict them in a slightly fuzzy, Impressionistic style. You must 
choose both your content and the way in which you will present that content.
Both decisions will signiﬁ cantly inﬂ uence the player’s experience of the game, 
jointly creating a distinct atmosphere. In general, the style of depiction tends to 
superimpose its mood on the style of the object depicted. For example, a Greek 
temple might be architecturally elegant, but if its style of drawing suggests a 
Looney Tunes cartoon, players will expect something wacky and outrageous to take 
place there. The drawing style imposes its own atmosphere over the temple, no 
matter how majestic it is. For one example, take a look at Naruto: Ultimate Ninja 
Storm (see Figure 4.11). All the locations in Naruto are rendered in a ﬂ at-shaded 
style reminiscent of the comic book that inspired the game.
Unless you’re the lead artist for your game as well as its designer, you probably 
shouldn’t—or won’t be allowed to—deﬁ ne the style by yourself. Your art team will 
have ideas of its own, and you should listen to those suggestions. The marketing 
department might insist on having a say as well. It’s important, however, that you 
try to keep the style harmonious and consistent throughout your game. Too many 
games have been published in which different sections had wildly differing art 
styles because no one held and enforced a single overall vision.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME WORLDS 
101
 CHAPTER 4
OVERUSED SETTINGS
All too often, games borrow settings from one another or from common settings 
found in the movies, books, or television. A huge number of games are set in sci-
ence ﬁ ction and fantasy worlds, especially the quasi-medieval, sword-and-sorcery 
fantasy inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien and Dungeons & Dragons, popular with the 
young people who used to be the primary—indeed, almost the only—market for 
computer games. But a more diverse audience plays games nowadays, and they 
want new worlds to play in. You should look beyond these hoary old staples of 
gaming. As Chapter 3 mentioned, Interstate ’76 is inspired by 1970s TV shows. It 
includes cars, clothing, music, and language from that era, all highly distinctive 
and evocative of a particular culture. Interstate ’76 has great gameplay, but what 
really sets it apart from its competitors is that it looks and sounds like nothing else 
on the market.
Especially if you are going to do science ﬁ ction or fantasy, try to make your game’s 
setting distinctively different. At present, real spacecraft built by the United States 
or Russia look extremely functional, just as the ﬁ rst cars did in the 1880s, and the 
spacecraft in computer games tend to look that way also. But as cars became more 
common, they began exhibiting stylistic variation to appeal to different kinds of 
people, and now there is a whole school of aesthetics for automotive design. As 
spacecraft become more common, and especially as we start to see personal space-
craft, we should expect them to exhibit stylistic variation as well. This is an area in 
which you have tremendous freedom to innovate.
FIGURE 4.11
Naruto overlays the 
architecture of a mod-
ern Japanese city, and 
many other places, 
with a comic book style. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

102 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
The same goes for fantasy. Forget the same old elves, dwarves, wizards, and dragons 
(Figure 4.12). Look to other cultures for your heroes and villains. Right now about 
the only non-Western culture portrayed with any frequency in games is Japanese 
(feudal, present-day, and future) because the Japanese make a lot of games and their 
style has found some acceptance in the West as well. But there are many more 
sources of inspiration around the world, most untapped. Around AD 1200, while 
the rulers of Europe were still holed up in cramped, drafty castles, Islamic culture 
reached a pinnacle of grace and elegance, building magniﬁ cent palaces ﬁ lled with 
the riches of the Orient and majestic mosques of inlaid stone. Yet this proud and 
beautiful civilization seldom appears in computer games because Western game 
designers haven’t bothered to learn about it or don’t even know it existed. Set your 
fantasy in Valhalla, in Russia under Peter the Great, in the arctic tundra, at Angkor 
Wat, at Easter Island, or at Machu Picchu.
SOURCES OF INSPIRATION
Art and architecture, history and anthropology, literature and religion, clothing 
fashions, and product design are all great sources of cultural material. Artistic and 
architectural movements, in particular, offer tremendous riches: Art Nouveau, Art 
Deco, Palladian, Brutalism. If you haven’t heard of one of these, go look it up now. 
Browse the web or the art, architecture, and design sections of the bookstore or the 
public library for pictures of interesting objects, buildings, and clothing. Carry a 
digital camera around and take pictures of things that attract your eye, then post 
the pictures around your workspace to inspire yourself and your coworkers. Collect 
FIGURE 4.12
Yet another quasi-
medieval setting: 
Armies of Exigo


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME WORLDS 
103
 CHAPTER 4
graphic scrap from anywhere that you ﬁ nd it. Try old copies of National Geographic.
Visit museums of art, design, and natural history if you can get to them; one of the 
greatest resources of all is travel, if you can afford it. A good game designer is always
on the lookout for new ideas, even when he’s ostensibly on vacation.
It’s tempting to borrow from our closest visual neighbor, the movies, because
the moviemakers have already done the visual design work for us. Blade Runner
introduced the decaying urban future; Alien gave us disgustingly biological aliens 
rather than little green men. The problem with these looks is that they’ve already 
been borrowed many, many times. You can use them as a quick-and-dirty backdrop 
if you don’t want to put much effort into developing your world, and players will 
instantly recognize the world and know what the game is about. But to stand out 
from the crowd, consider other genres. Film noir, the Marx Brothers, John Wayne 
westerns, war movies from the World War II era, costume dramas of all periods—
from the silliness of One Million Years B.C. to the Regency elegance of Pride and 
Prejudice, they’re all grist for the mill.
Television goes through its own distinct phases, and because it’s even more 
fashion-driven than the movies, it is ripe for parody. The comedies of the 1950s 
and 1960s and the nighttime soaps of the 1970s and 1980s all had characteristic 
looks that seem laughable today but that are immediately familiar to most adult 
Americans. This is not without risk; if you make explicit references to American 
popular culture, non-Americans and children might not get the references. If your 
gameplay is good enough, though, it shouldn’t matter.
The Emotional Dimension
The emotional dimension of a game world deﬁ nes not only the emotions of the 
people in the world but, more important, the emotions that you, as a designer, 
hope to arouse in the player. Multiplayer games evoke the widest variety of emo-
tions, because the players are socializing with real people and making friends (and, 
alas, enemies) as they play. Single-player games have to inﬂ uence players’ emotions 
with storytelling and gameplay. Action and strategy games are usually limited to a 
narrow emotional dimension, but other games that rely more heavily on story and 
characters can offer rich emotional content that deeply affects the player.
The idea of manipulating the player’s emotions might seem a little strange. For 
much of their history, games have been seen only as light entertainment, a means 
to while away a few hours in a fantasy world. But just because that’s all they have 
been doesn’t mean that’s all they can be. In terms of the richness of their emotional 
content, games are now just about where the movies were when they moved from 
the nickelodeon to the screen. Greater emotional variety enables us to reach new 
players who value it.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

104 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
INFLUENCING THE PLAYER’S FEELINGS
Games are intrinsically good at evoking feelings related to the player’s efforts to 
achieve something. They can create “the thrill of victory and the agony of defeat,” 
as the old ABC Wide World of Sports introduction used to say. Use the elements of 
risk and reward—a price for failure and a prize for success—to further heighten 
these emotions. Games can also produce frustration as a by-product of their chal-
lenges, but this isn’t a good thing; some players tolerate frustration poorly and stop 
playing if it gets too high. To reduce frustration, build games with player-settable 
difﬁ culty levels and make sure the easy level is genuinely easy. Excitement and 
anticipation, too, play large roles in many games. If you can devise a close contest 
or a series of stimulating challenges, you will generate these kinds of emotions.
Construction and management simulations, whose challenges are usually ﬁ nancial, 
arouse the player’s feelings of ambition, greed, and desire for power or control. 
They also offer the emotional rewards of creative play. Give the player a way to 
amass a fortune, then let her spend it to build things of her own design. The 
SimCity and various Tycoon games (RollerCoaster Tycoon, Railroad Tycoon, and so on), 
do this well. Artiﬁ cial life games and god games such as Spore or The Sims let the 
player control the lives of autonomous people and creatures for better or worse, sat-
isfying a desire to be omnipotent over a world of beings subject to the player’s will. 
(This may not be a very admirable fantasy, but it’s one that a lot of people enjoy 
having fulﬁ lled.)
To create suspense, surprise, and fear, use the time-honored techniques of horror 
ﬁ lms: darkness, sudden noises, disgusting imagery, and things that jump out at the 
player unexpectedly. Don’t overdo it, however. A gore-fest becomes tedious after a 
while, and Alfred Hitchcock demonstrated that the shock is all the greater when it 
occurs infrequently. For suspense to work well, the player needs to feel vulnerable 
and unprepared. Don’t arm him too heavily; the world’s a lot less scary when you’re 
carrying a rocket launcher around. Survival horror is a popular subgenre of action 
game, as seen in the Silent Hill and Resident Evil series, that uses these approaches.
Another class of emotions is produced by interactions between characters and the 
player’s identiﬁ cation with one of them. Love, grief, shame, jealousy, and outrage 
are all emotions that can result from such interactions. (See Figure 4.13 for a 
famous example.) To evoke them, you’ll have to use storytelling techniques, creat-
ing characters that the player cares about and believes in and credible relationships 
between them. Once you get the player to identify with someone, threaten that 
character or place obstacles in his path in a way that holds the player’s interest. 
This is the essence of dramatic tension, whether you’re watching Greek tragedy or 
reading Harry Potter. Something important must be at stake. The problem need not 
necessarily be physical danger; it can also be a social, emotional, or economic risk. 
The young women in Jane Austen’s novels were not in imminent peril of death or 
starvation, but it was essential to their family’s social standing and ﬁ nancial future 
for them to make good marriages. The conﬂ ict between their personal desires and 
their family obligations provides the tension in the novels.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME WORLDS 
105
 CHAPTER 4
A good many games set the danger at hyperbolic levels with extreme claims such
as “The fate of the universe rests in your hands!” This kind of hyperbole appeals to 
young people, who often feel powerless and have fantasies about being powerful. 
To adults, it just sounds a bit silly. At the end of Casablanca, Rick said, “The prob-
lems of three little people don’t amount to a hill of beans in this crazy world,” but 
he was wrong. The whole movie, a movie still popular over a half century after its 
ﬁ rst release, is about the problems of those three little people. For the duration of 
the ﬁ lm, these problems hold us entranced. It isn’t necessary for the fate of the 
world to be at stake; it is the fates of Rick, Ilsa, and Victor that tug at our hearts.
DESIGN RULE Avoid Implausible Extremes
Don’t make your game about the fate of the world if you are serious about producing 
emotional resonance with your audience; the fate of the world is too big to grasp. Make 
your game about the fate of people instead.
THE LIMITATIONS OF FUN
Weaver’s Law: The quality of an entertainment is inversely proportional to the awareness 
of time engaged in it.
—CHRIS WEAVER, FOUNDER OF BETHESDA SOFTWORKS
Most people think that the purpose of playing games is to have fun, but fun is a 
rather limiting term. It tends to suggest excitement and pleasure, either a physical 
pleasure such as riding a roller coaster, a social pleasure such as joking around with 
friends, or an intellectual pleasure such as playing cards or a board game. The prob-
lem with striving for fun is that it tends to limit the emotional range of games. 
Suspense, excitement, exhilaration, surprise, and various forms of pleasure fall within 
the deﬁ nition of fun, but not pity, jealousy, anger, sorrow, guilt, outrage, or despair.
You might think that nobody in their right mind would want to explore these emo-
tions, but other forms of entertainment—books, movies, television—do it all the 
FIGURE 4.13
The death of Aeris, 
from Final Fantasy VII


--- PAGE BREAK ---

106 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
time. And, in fact, that’s the key: Those media don’t provide only fun; they provide 
entertainment. You can entertain people in all sorts of ways. Movies with sad end-
ings aren’t fun in the conventional sense, but they’re still entertaining. Although 
we say that we make games, what we in fact make is interactive entertainment. The 
potential of our medium to explore emotions and the human condition is much 
greater than the term fun game allows for. A good game is entertainment that 
involves the player on a number of levels.
All that said, however, bear in mind that most publishers and players want fun. Too 
many inexperienced designers are actually more interested in showing how clever 
they are than in making sure the player has a good time; they place their own cre-
ative agenda before the player’s enjoyment. As a designer, you must master the 
ability to create fun—light enjoyment—before you move on to more complex emo-
tional issues. Addressing unpleasant or painful emotions successfully is a greater 
aesthetic challenge and is commercially risky besides.
YOU CAN’T PAINT EMOTION BY NUMBERS
The idea that games should include more emotional content and should inspire 
more emotions in players has been gaining ground in the game industry for several 
years. Unfortunately, this has produced a tendency to look for quick and easy ways 
to do it, mostly by relying on clichés. The young man whose family is killed and 
who is obsessed by his desire for revenge or the beautiful princess who needs to be 
rescued both belong more to fairy tales than to modern ﬁ ction. That may be all right 
if your game aspires to nothing more, but it won’t do if you’re trying to create an 
experience with any subtlety. Contrast, for example, the simple themes of the early 
animation ﬁ lms and the more psychologically rich stories in the recent Pixar ﬁ lms.
Beware of books or articles that offer simple formulas for emotional manipulation: 
“If you want to make the player feel X, just do Y to the protagonist.” An imagina-
tive and novel approach to inﬂ uencing the players’ feelings requires the talents of a 
skilled storyteller. Paint-by-numbers emotional content has all the sensitivity and 
nuance of paint-by-numbers art.
The Ethical Dimension
The ethical dimension of a game world deﬁ nes what right and wrong mean within 
the context of that world. At ﬁ rst glance, this might seem kind of silly—it’s only a 
game, so there’s no need to talk about ethics. But most games that have a setting,
a fantasy component, also have an ethical system that deﬁ nes how the player is 
supposed to behave. As a designer, you are the god of the game’s world, and you 
establish its morality. When you tell a player that he must perform certain actions 
to win the game, you are deﬁ ning those actions as good or desirable. Likewise, 
when you say that the player must avoid certain actions, you are deﬁ ning them as 
bad or undesirable. The players who come into the world must adopt your stan-
dards or they will lose the game.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME WORLDS 
107
 CHAPTER 4
In some respects, the morality of a game world is part of its culture and history, 
which are part of the environmental dimension, but because the ethical dimension 
poses special design problems, it needs a separate discussion. The ethics of most 
game worlds deviate somewhat from those of the real world—sometimes they’re 
entirely reversed. Games allow, even require, you to do things that you can’t do in 
the real world. The range of actions that the game world permits is typically nar-
rower than in the real world (you can ﬂ y your F-15 ﬁ ghter jet all you want, but you 
can’t get out of the plane), but often the permitted actions are quite extreme: kill-
ing people, stealing things, and so on.
MORAL DECISION-MAKING
On the whole, most games have simple ethics: clobber the bad guys, protect the 
good guys. It’s not subtle but it’s perfectly functional; that’s how you play checkers. 
Not many games explore the ethical dimension in any depth. A few include explicit 
moral choices, but unfortunately, these tend to be namby-pamby, consistently 
rewarding good behavior and punishing bad behavior. Such preachy material turns 
off even children, not to mention adults. But you can build a richer, more involv-
ing game by giving the player tough moral choices to make. Ethical ambiguity and 
difﬁ cult decisions are at the heart of many great stories and, indeed, much of life. 
Should you send a platoon of soldiers to certain death to save a battalion of others? 
How would you feel if you were in the platoon?
In many role-playing games, you can choose to play as an evil character who steals 
and kills indiscriminately, but other characters will refuse to cooperate with you 
and might even attack you on sight. It’s easier to get money by robbing others than 
by working for it, but you may pay a price for that behavior in other ways. Rather 
than impose a rule that says, “Immoral behavior is forbidden,” the game imple-
ments a rule that says, “You are free to make your own moral choices, but be 
prepared to live with the consequences.” This is a more adult approach to the issue 
than simply punishing bad behavior.
You must be sure to explain the ethical dimension of your game clearly in the man-
ual, in introductory material, or in mission brieﬁ ngs. For example, some games that 
have hostage-rescue scenarios make the death of a hostage a loss condition: If a 
hostage dies, the player loses. This means that the player has to be extra careful not 
to kill any hostages, even at the risk of his own avatar’s life. In other games, the 
only loss condition is the avatar’s death. In this case, many players shoot with com-
plete abandon, killing hostages and their captors indiscriminately. In real life, of 
course, the truth is somewhere in between. Police ofﬁ cers who accidentally shoot a 
hostage are seldom prosecuted unless they’ve been grossly negligent, but it doesn’t 
do their careers any good. You can emulate this by penalizing the player somehow. 
To be fair to the player, however, you need to make this clear at the outset.
The ethical dimension of multiplayer games, whether online or local, is an enormous 
and separate problem. Chapter 21, “Online Games,” discusses this issue at length.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

108 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
THE PECULIAR MORALITY OF AMERICA’S ARMY
America’s Army, a team-based multiplayer ﬁ rst-person shooter (FPS) game distributed 
free by the U.S. Army, is intended to serve as an education and recruiting tool, teaching 
players how real soldiers are supposed to ﬁ ght (Figure 4.14). It differs from most FPS 
games in two signiﬁ cant ways. First, it requires that the player act in conformance with 
the actual disciplinary requirements of the Army, so it detects and punishes dishonorable 
behavior. The Army is anxious to make the point that soldiering comes with serious 
moral responsibilities. Second, and rather strangely, all sides in a ﬁ reﬁ ght see them-
selves as U.S. soldiers, and they see the enemy as rather generic terrorists. The Army did 
not want to give any player the chance to shoot at American soldiers, even though they 
are obviously shooting at one another. So a player sees himself and his teammates as 
U.S. soldiers carrying M-16 riﬂ es, but his opponents see him and his teammates as ter-
rorists carrying AK-47s. In other words, everyone perceives himself as a good guy and his 
opponent as a bad guy, and the game’s graphics literally present two different versions 
of reality to each team. By avoiding a politically unacceptable design (letting players 
shoot at American soldiers in a game made by the U.S. Army), they created a moral equiv-
alence: The question of who is in the right is purely a matter of perspective. America’s 
Army’s trick of displaying different versions of the game world to different players may 
be unique among video games.
FIGURE 4.14 Our guys get the drop on somebody who also thinks he’s one of our guys.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME WORLDS 
109
 CHAPTER 4
A WORD ABOUT GAME VIOLENCE
It’s not part of this book’s mission to debate, much less offer an answer for, the 
problem of whether violent video games cause violent behavior in children or 
adults. This is a psychological question that only prolonged and careful study can 
resolve. Unfortunately, a good many people on both sides of the issue seem to have 
made up their minds already, and arguments continue to rage in government and 
the media, supported for the most part by very few facts.
For you, as a designer, however, consider these suggestions. The essence of many 
games is conﬂ ict, and conﬂ ict is often represented as violence in varying degrees of 
realism. Chess is a war game in which pieces are killed—removed from the board—
but nobody objects to the violence of chess; it’s entirely abstract. American football 
is a violent contact sport in which real people get injured all the time, but there are 
no serious efforts to ban football, either. The only way to remove violence from 
gameplay is to prohibit most of the games in the world because most contain vio-
lence in some more-or-less abstract form. The issue is not violence, per se, but how 
violence is portrayed and the circumstances under which violence is acceptable.
Games get into political trouble when they have a close visual similarity to the real 
world but an ethical dimension that is strongly divergent from the real world. The 
game Kingpin encourages the player to beat prostitutes to death with a crowbar, 
with bloodily realistic graphics. Not surprisingly, it has earned a lot of criticism.
On the other hand, Space Invaders involves shooting hundreds of aliens, but it is so 
visually abstract that nobody minds. In other words, the more a game resembles 
reality visually, the more its ethical dimension should resemble reality as well, or 
it’s likely to make people upset. If you want to make a game in which you encour-
age the player to shoot anything that moves, you’re most likely to stay out of 
trouble if those targets are nonhuman and just quietly disappear rather than break 
apart into bloody chunks. Tie your ethical realism to your visual realism.
Computer games are about bringing fantasies to life, enabling people to do things 
in make-believe that they couldn’t possibly do in the real world. But make-believe 
is a dangerous game when it’s played by people for whom the line between fantasy 
and reality is not clear. Young children (those under about age eight) don’t know 
much about the real world; they don’t know what is possible and what isn’t, what is 
fantasy and what is reality. An important part of raising children is teaching them 
this difference. But until they’ve learned it, it’s best to make sure that any violence 
in young children’s games is suitably proportionate to their age. The problem with 
showing violence to children is not the violence, per se, but the notion that there’s 
no price to pay for it. For a detailed and insightful discussion of how children come 
to terms with violence, read Killing Monsters: Why Children Need Fantasy, Super 
Heroes, and Make-Believe Violence by Gerard Jones (Jones, 2002). Ultimately, the vio-
lence in a game should serve the gameplay. If it doesn’t, then it’s gratuitous and 
you should consider doing without it. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

110
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Realism
Chapter 2, “Design Components and Processes,” introduces the concept of realism
in the context of a discussion about core mechanics. All games, no matter how real-
istic, require some abstraction and simpliﬁ cation of the real world. Even the multimillion-
dollar ﬂ ight simulators used for training commercial pilots are incapable of turning 
the cockpit completely upside down. This event is so rare (we hope) in passenger 
aircraft that it’s not worth the extra money it would take to simulate it.
The degree of realism of any aspect of a game appears on a continuum of possibili-
ties from highly representational at one end to highly abstract at the other. Players 
and game reviewers often talk about realism as a quality of an entire game, but in 
fact, the level of realism differs in individual components of the game. Many games 
have highly realistic graphics but unrealistic physics. A good many ﬁ rst-person 
shooters accurately model the performance characteristics of a variety of weap-
ons—their rate of ﬁ re, size of ammunition clips, accuracy, and so on—but allow the 
player to carry about 10 of them at once with no reduction in speed or mobility. 
Therefore, realism is not a single dimension of a game world, but a multivariate 
quality that applies to all parts of the game and everything in it. 
The representational/abstract dichotomy is mostly useful as a starting point when 
you’re thinking about what kind of a game you want to create. On the one hand,
if you’re designing a cartoony action game such as Ratchet & Clank, you know that 
it’s going to be mostly abstract. As you design elements of the game, you’ll need
to ask yourself how much realism you want to include. Can your avatar be hurt 
when he falls long distances? Is there a limit to how much he can carry at once?
Do Newtonian physics apply to him, or can he change directions in midair?
On the other hand, if you’re designing a game that people will expect to be repre-
sentational—a vehicle or sports simulation, for example—then you have to think 
about it from the other direction. What aspects of the real world are you going to 
remove? Most modern ﬁ ghter aircraft have literally hundreds of controls; that’s 
why only a special group of people can be ﬁ ghter pilots. To make a ﬁ ghter simula-
tion accessible to the general public, you’ll have to simplify a lot of those controls. 
Similarly, a ﬁ ghter jet’s engine is so powerful that certain maneuvers can knock the 
pilot unconscious or even rip the plane apart. Are you going to simulate these limi-
tations accurately, or make the game a little more abstract by not requiring the 
player to think about them?
Once again: Every design decision you make must serve the entertainment value of 
the game. In addition, every design decision must serve your goals for the game’s 
overall degree of realism. Some genres demand more realism than others. It’s up to 
you to establish how much realism you want and in what areas. You must also 
make sure that your decisions about realism don’t destroy the game’s harmony and 
balance. During the design process, you must continually monitor your decisions 
to see if they are meeting your goals.
NOTE If you’re math-
ematically inclined, 
think of realism as a 
vector over every as-
pect of the game, with 
values ranging from 
0, entirely abstract, 
to 1, entirely realistic. 
However, no value 
ever equals 1 because 
nothing about a game 
is ever entirely realis-
tic—if it were, it would 
be life, not a game.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

