114 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
4. What range of choices am I offering my player? Are there both violent and non-
violent ways to accomplish something? Is the player rewarded in any way for 
minimizing casualties, or is he punished for ignoring them?
5. In many games, the end—winning the game—justiﬁ es any means that the game 
allows. Do I want to deﬁ ne the victory conditions in such a way that not all means 
are acceptable?
6. Are any other ethical questions present in my game world? Can my player lie, 
cheat, steal, break promises, or double-cross anyone? Can she abuse, torture, or 
enslave anyone? Are there positive or negative consequences for these actions?
7. Does my world contain any ethical ambiguities or moral dilemmas? How does 
making one choice over another affect the player, the plot, and the gameplay?
8. How realistic is my portrayal of violence? Does the realism appropriately serve 
the entertainment value of the game?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 CHAPTER 5
Creative and 
Expressive Play
Playing any game involves an element of self-expression because the decisions a 
player makes reﬂ ect his play style: cautious or reckless, aggressive or defensive, and 
so on. Video games can let players express themselves in the ways traditional games 
always have and in a variety of other ways as well. This chapter examines several 
types of creative play that you can build into a game: self-deﬁ ning play, in which 
players modify the avatar that represents them in the game; constrained creative 
play, in which players may exercise their creativity but only within certain limits; 
freeform, or unconstrained, creative play; and storytelling, in which players present 
other players with a drama of their own invention. We end the chapter by brieﬂ y 
discussing some features you may wish to include that allow players to modify your 
game for their own entertainment: level editors, mods, and bots.
Self-Deﬁ ning Play
When a player selects a token to represent herself in Monopoly, she chooses an ava-
tar and so engages in an act of self-deﬁ nition. Many games allow the player to 
choose an avatar from a number of different ones available and to customize the 
avatar in various ways. Because the avatar represents the player in the game world, 
these activities are called self-deﬁ ning play. Players greatly enjoy deﬁ ning them-
selves, choosing an avatar that either resembles them physically (if it’s a human 
character) or that is a fantasy ﬁ gure with whom they identify. Female players in 
particular like to choose or design avatars and dislike having to play with avatars 
that they ﬁ nd unappealing. Boys and men are more willing to play with a default 
avatar the game supplies.
Forms of Personality Expression
Self-deﬁ ning play gives the player an opportunity to project his personality into 
the game world by means other than gameplay choices. It takes several forms:
■ Avatar selection allows the player to choose from a number of predeﬁ ned avatars, 
usually at the beginning of the game. These avatars are most often humanoid char-
acters, but in driving and ﬂ ying games, they’re vehicles. Many driving games start the 
player with a small selection of cars, motorcycles, or whatever vehicles are involved
CHAPTER 5
115


--- PAGE BREAK ---

116
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
 and make new choices available as the player’s performance improves. You can let 
the player purchase a new car with winnings earned in previous races, for example. 
The right to choose a new and more powerful avatar serves as a reward to some players.
■ Avatar customization allows the player to modify the appearance or abilities of 
his avatar by selecting interchangeable features. In role-playing games, this often 
takes the form of giving the avatar new skills, clothing, weapons, and armor. In 
driving games, the customizable features may include the paint color of the car and 
its engine, transmission, tires, and brakes. Customization can occur both at the 
beginning of the game and through upgrades awarded or purchased as the game 
goes on. In this way, a player creates a unique character of his own design.
■ Avatar construction gives the player the greatest freedom of all; he can con-
struct his avatar from the ground up, choosing every detail from a set of available 
options. Usually offered in role-playing games, avatar construction allows the 
player to choose such features as the sex, body type, skin color, and clothing of the 
avatar, as well as the avatar’s strength, intelligence, dexterity, and other functional 
qualities. The online RPG Lord of the Rings Online offers a particularly extensive ava-
tar construction feature, as does the single-player RPG The Elder Scrolls IV: Oblivion
for the PC.
Understanding Attributes
The qualities that a player modiﬁ es when constructing or customizing an avatar are 
called attributes. Chapter 10, “Core Mechanics,” discusses attributes in more detail, 
but for now, it’s enough to know that an attribute is any quality that helps to 
describe something else. Hair color is an attribute of a person. Maximum airspeed is 
an attribute of an aircraft. The computer can represent an attribute as a numeric 
value (such as maximum airspeed) or a symbolic value (such as hair color). All 
attributes in a video game must be characterized in one of these two ways. Even if 
you create an attribute intended to describe something that we normally think of 
as unquantiﬁ able, like smell, ultimately it will come down to either a numeric or a 
symbolic value.
You can divide attributes in a game into those that affect the gameplay, which are 
called functional attributes, and those that don’t affect the gameplay, which are 
called cosmetic attributes. (Some designers prefer the term aesthetic attributes, but the 
meaning is the same.) The next two sections examine these types more closely.
FUNCTIONAL ATTRIBUTES
Functional attributes inﬂ uence the gameplay through interactions with the core 
mechanics. Functional attributes can be further divided into characterization attri-
butes, which deﬁ ne fundamental aspects of a character and change slowly or not at 
all, and status attributes, which give the current status of the character and may 
change frequently. For example, maximum airspeed is a characterization attribute


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CREATIVE AND  EXPRESSIVE PLAY 
117
 CHAPTER 5
of an aircraft, while current airspeed is a status attribute. For the purposes of creative 
play, we’re interested in the characterization attributes. 
You have probably heard of the six characterization attributes used in Dungeons & 
Dragons: strength, dexterity, intelligence, wisdom, charisma, and constitution. Each 
of these attributes affects a character’s ability to perform certain actions in the 
game: ﬁ ght, cast magic spells, charm others, withstand poisons, and many other 
tasks. When a Dungeons & Dragons player creates a character, she receives a certain 
number of points (usually obtained by rolling dice) to distribute among these attri-
butes. How she distributes them—giving more to dexterity and less to intelligence, 
for instance—establishes the character’s strengths and weaknesses. These strengths 
and weaknesses, in turn, determine how the player must play with the character to 
be successful in the game: taking advantage of the strengths and avoiding situa-
tions in which the weaknesses render the player vulnerable.
When a player sets the characterization attributes of her character, the player 
deﬁ nes herself in a creative way. Hardcore players, whose main interest is in win-
ning, tend to look for the setting that gives them the greatest advantage in the 
game—that is, to optimize the attributes’ inﬂ uence on the core mechanics. Casual 
players either don’t worry about the assignments much, or they select settings that 
allow for interesting role-playing. A character who is highly charismatic but physi-
cally weak, for example, has to be played quite differently from a conventional 
warrior.
If you allow players to assign any legitimate value to their functional attributes, 
some players will set up their attributes in the best possible conﬁ guration, and the 
game will be very easy for them. Many designers don’t like this, because they see 
the players as their opponents. However, that’s a bad reason to disallow it; your 
goal is to entertain the player, not to oppose him. However, you can legitimately 
prevent the players from maximizing all their attributes if it might introduce bugs 
into your game or make the game difﬁ cult to test. Instead, consider the following 
approaches:
■ Give players a ﬁ xed or random number of points to assign among all their attri-
butes, as in Dungeons & Dragons. This allows them to make interesting choices and 
create an avatar who reﬂ ects their own personality or fantasies without unbalanc-
ing the game. If you generate a random number of points for the player, use a 
nonuniform distribution as Dungeons & Dragons does in order to avoid producing 
unusually strong or weak characters. See “Random Numbers and the Gaussian 
Curve” in Chapter 10.
■ Include a set of default, or recommended, settings so players who want to get 
started quickly can do so without spending a lot of time setting attributes. This is 
especially valuable for players who don’t understand how the attributes affect the 
gameplay anyway. They will ﬁ nd it frustrating to be required to set attributes when 
they don’t know how the attributes affect the game and all they want to do is get 
into the game and start playing. They will appreciate being given a reasonable default.
NOTE If the player’s 
choice of avatar or 
attribute settings 
will have an effect on 
the gameplay, you 
must make the con-
sequences of those 
choices reasonably 
clear to the player. If 
you require the player 
to make this decision 
before play begins, 
either all choices 
must provide an equal 
chance of winning 
(even if the fastest way 
to win varies from one 
choice to another), 
or you should clearly 
mark the choices that 
make the gameplay 
easier or harder. Don’t 
force your players to 
choose an avatar or set 
its attributes without 
telling them how those 
choices will affect their 
chances of winning. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

118 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ Allow players to earn the right to set their character’s functional attributes any 
way they like by completing the game with constrained attributes ﬁ rst. You can 
also offer this right explicitly as a cheat feature of the game, so players will know 
they’re getting an unusual advantage.
Dungeons & Dragons provides one of the most familiar examples of player-adjustable 
functional attributes, but many, many games use them. First-person shooters typi-
cally give the player a choice of weapons, and when a player chooses a sniper riﬂ e 
over a submachine gun, she is saying something important about her character and 
the way she will play the game.
COSMETIC ATTRIBUTES
Cosmetic attributes don’t have any effect on the player’s ability to perform actions
or overcome challenges; that is, they’re not part of the core mechanics of the game. 
Cosmetic attributes exist to let the player deﬁ ne himself in the game world, to 
bring his own personal style to the avatar. The paint color of a racing car has no 
effect on the car’s performance characteristics, but the player is apt to enjoy the 
game more if he can choose a color that he likes. One cosmetic attribute—shape—
differentiates the tokens in Monopoly.
SHOULD SEX BE A FUNCTIONAL
ATTRIBUTE OR A COSMETIC ATTRIBUTE?
Should the sex of an avatar have an effect on gameplay? Because men generally have 
more upper-body strength than women do and women are generally more dexterous 
than men are, you may be tempted to build these qualities directly into your core 
mechanics: to restrict the strength of female avatars and to restrict the dexterity of
male ones.
However, unless you’re making an extremely realistic simulation game, it’s better not to 
associate bonuses or penalties with one sex or the other. First, although men as a group 
are generally stronger than women, it is not true that all men are stronger than all 
women. Women who exercise are often stronger than men who don’t, and men who play 
the piano are usually more dexterous than women who don’t. There are always exceptions 
and overlaps. Second, video games provide a form of escapism. Players like to imagine 
themselves doing things that they can’t do in the real world. If you impose real-world 
rules on what is meant to be their fantasy experience, you take some of the fun out of it.
It’s better to allow the players to construct their avatars to suit their own styles of play 
rather than to establish an arbitrary standard connected to gender. Leave gender as a 
cosmetic attribute and let the players adjust their functional attributes, such as strength 
and dexterity, independently.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CREATIVE AND  EXPRESSIVE PLAY 
119
 CHAPTER 5
In multiplayer video games, cosmetic attributes can play a more important role 
because other players rely on visual appearances to make decisions. A few years ago, 
some bright player in a ﬁ rst-person shooter game got the idea to design an avatar 
that looked exactly like a crate. The other players assumed that they were looking 
at an actual crate, so they ignored it and then were surprised when they were shot 
by someone in a room that apparently contained only a crate. In online role-play-
ing games, players also use cosmetic attributes to identify themselves as members 
of a particular clan or group.
Cosmetic attributes make a game more fun at a low implementation cost. Because 
they don’t affect the gameplay, they don’t have to be tested and balanced as thor-
oughly as a functional attribute. Just be sure that your cosmetic attributes really are
cosmetic. Avatar body size may sound like a cosmetic attribute, but if you later 
decide to take it into account when performing combat calculations (bigger people 
make bigger targets, for instance), then size becomes a functional attribute after all.
Typical cosmetic attributes for human characters include headgear, clothing, shoes, 
jewelry, hair color, eye color, skin color, and body type or size. Players typically cus-
tomize paint color and decals or insignia of vehicles.
Creative Play
Many games offer the player the chance to design or build something. In the
Caesar series, it’s a Roman city; in Spore, it’s a creature. People enjoy designing and 
building things, and this kind of play is the main point of construction and man-
agement simulations.
If you offer creative play, you should allow players to save their creations at any 
time and reload them to continue working on them. You should also let players 
print their creations out, take screenshots, copy them to other players’ machines, 
and upload them to web sites. Sharing creations contributes to the fun.
Computerized creative play falls into two categories, constrained creative play and 
freeform creative play. A computerized game necessarily restricts creative play to 
whatever domain the game supports—painting, composing music, animation, and 
so on. In freeform creative play, few or no rules limit what the player can do within 
the conﬁ nes of the game world, although play remains constrained by the domain, 
the set of actions that the user interface offers, and the machine’s physical 
limitations.
Constrained Creative Play
If the player may only create within artiﬁ cial constraints imposed by the rules, her 
activity is called constrained creative play. Constraining creativity may sound unde-
sirable, but it really just provides a structure for the player’s creativity. This type of 
gameplay grows out of some familiar ideas: the expressive power offered by 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

120 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
creativity tools; the growth in the number of actions available to a player as games 
progress; and the fact that players must overcome challenges in order to succeed. 
These may be combined in various ways, as the next two sections discuss.
PLAY LIMITED BY AN ECONOMY
In SimCity, the player can’t build a whole city immediately; it costs money to zone 
each empty plot of land, and he can use only the money he has available. As his 
city prospers, he earns more money and so can establish new neighborhoods. Once 
he gets enough money, new features such as stadiums and airports, which were too 
expensive in the early stages of the game, become available to him. So long as the 
player continues to produce economic growth, he can make his city ever larger and 
add more and more facilities.
Construction and management simulations routinely implement this system of 
structuring the player’s creativity. The player must successfully manage an econ-
omy to construct larger creations and also to get additional creative power. This is
a system closely related to that found in role-playing games, in which players must 
gain experience to learn new magic spells, and to that found in strategy games, in 
which players must harvest resources to perform the research necessary to get bet-
ter weapons. In those genres, the economy of the game limits the player’s ability to 
have adventures and ﬁ ght wars; in creativity games, the economy limits the play-
er’s ability to create. The primary challenge in such games is successful economic 
management, with creative power serving as the reward for success.
This system rewards skill, granting players more exciting and powerful tools once 
they master the tools they already have. Educational software also uses this 
mechanism.
CREATING TO PHYSICAL STANDARDS
Another approach to constrained creative play gives players all the tools and 
resources they would like but requires them to construct an object that meets cer-
tain requirements, usually having to do with making the object perform a 
function. For example, Spore from Maxis lets players design and build virtual crea-
tures that then interact with creatures created by other players. The player gets a set 
of standard parts including arms and legs, eyes and ears, and weapons such as 
claws. Once the player constructs a creature, she turns it loose in the game world to 
ﬁ ght or socialize with other creatures, and she can add additional features as she 
earns “DNA points.” Although Spore can animate almost anything no matter how 
odd-looking, it does impose some physical standards: every creature must have a 
backbone and be a land animal. The game offers no way to create a creature with 
an exoskeleton, like an insect, or no skeleton at all, like an octopus. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CREATIVE AND  EXPRESSIVE PLAY 
121
 CHAPTER 5
The RollerCoaster Tycoon series requires the player to construct roller coasters in a 
theme park. The roller coaster must be designed in such a way that it doesn’t crash 
or make the (virtual) riders sick but is still exciting to ride. RollerCoaster Tycoon com-
bines the challenge of meeting physical standards with an economic challenge: 
Each element of the theme park costs money, and the player must stay within a 
budget. 
Whenever you require the player to build to a standard and test his construction, 
when he fails he needs to know why—otherwise he can’t learn the principles upon 
which you based the standards. RollerCoaster Tycoon 2 includes a feature to show the 
player how high and how steep the different segments of the coaster are, so he can 
ﬁ gure it out with a little experimentation. See Figure 5.1.
CREATING TO AESTHETIC STANDARDS
With an adequate physics simulation, any game can test a player’s creativity against 
a physical standard. An architecture game can test a building both for structural 
integrity and also for usability—rooms with no way to get into them are useless.
Aesthetics present a much larger problem, because they don’t consist of a set of uni-
versal laws in the way that Newtonian physics does. To test the aesthetic quality of 
a player’s creations, you have to set some standards of your own. Consider some of 
the following options:
FIGURE 5.1 
RollerCoaster
Tycoon 2’s coaster-
design screen


--- PAGE BREAK ---

122 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ Test against a ﬁ xed set of rules that you establish. A game about clothing 
design could include well-known rules about color combinations, not mixing 
stripes with polka dots, and using fabric textures that harmonize and complement 
each other. This system rewards players who know the rules and conform to them. 
It’s good for teaching the basics, but it doesn’t encourage brilliant but unconven-
tional combinations. Ubisoft’s Imagine: Fashion Designer does something similar by 
requiring the player to design clothing for an AI “client.” Unfortunately, the game 
offers no way for the player to ﬁ nd out exactly what the client wants. If the client 
refuses to accept a design, he doesn’t say why, so the player has to ﬁ nd out by trial 
and error—a serious design ﬂ aw. If you plan to test the player’s creations against 
ﬁ xed rules, you must provide a way for the player to ﬁ nd out what the rules are by 
some better means than trial and error.
■ Create a system of trends that the player can research. If you want to make a 
game in which creative challenges change over time, the way fashion trends 
change from year to year, design a system in which the standard against which you 
measure the player’s work ﬂ uctuates. Each attribute of the player’s product could be 
tested against a trend with its own rate of variation, so—using the clothing exam-
ple again—hemlines might move up and down over a 10-year period, and preferred 
fabrics might change from synthetics to natural ﬁ bers over a 20-year period. The 
periodicity should never be completely regular or predictable, however. The trend 
information should be hidden from the player but partially accessible via a research 
process. When I ran a series of game design workshops on this theme, participants 
suggested several options for doing this research. The player, in the role of a fashion 
designer, could attend parties within the game and listen to computer-generated 
gossip, some of which would include clues about current trends; he could read auto-
matically created fashion magazines and newspapers for clues; or he could even 
break into other fashion designers’ workshops to ﬁ nd out about their works in 
progress.
■ Allow the public to vote online. You can let the players upload their creations 
to a web site and let the community vote on them. For example, The Sims 2: H&M 
Fashion Runway allows players to vote on clothing created in The Sims 2. This sys-
tem relieves the computer of the responsibility for determining the aesthetic 
quality of the player’s creations, but it signiﬁ cantly lengthens the time scale of the 
game—the player may have to wait hours or days until the votes come in unless 
the game has a large player base. You will also have to build a secure system that 
rewards players for voting and prevents vote rigging.
Freeform Creative Play and Sandbox Mode
If a game lets the player use all the facilities that it offers without any restrictions 
on the amount of time or resources available (other than those imposed by techno-
logical limitations), then it supports freeform creative play. Many games that normally
offer constrained creative play also include a special mode that removes ordinary 
constraints. This mode is called the sandbox mode. Sandbox mode lets the player do 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CREATIVE AND  EXPRESSIVE PLAY 
123
 CHAPTER 5
whatever he wants but usually doesn’t offer the same rewards as the constrained 
mode—and may not offer any rewards at all. In this mode, the game resembles a 
tool more than a conventional video game.
The ﬁ rst RollerCoaster Tycoon game did not include a sandbox mode, and reviews of 
the game cited it as a deﬁ ciency. The developers added a sandbox mode to the later 
editions. Generally speaking, if you are making a game that offers creative play, 
you should include a sandbox mode if you can. Players enjoy them, and because 
sandbox modes don’t interact much (if at all) with the game’s core mechanics, they 
are fairly easy to tune.
Two particularly interesting, though very early, forms of freeform creative play 
appeared in Pinball Construction Set and Adventure Construction Set. These games 
allowed the player to construct games that he or someone else could play. Much of 
the fun came from trying out the resulting game to see how it played and making 
reﬁ nements—in effect, they permitted game development (within quite restricted 
domains) without all the work of full-scale development.
Storytelling Play
Some players enjoy creating stories of their own, using features provided by a game, 
which they can then distribute online for others to read. The Movies, by Lionhead 
Software, stands as the most ambitious project of this kind to date. The purpose of 
the game is to let people make their own movies and share them online. Stunt 
Island, from Disney Interactive, also enables people to ﬁ lm their own movies, but it 
concentrates on stunts involving vehicles rather than actors. More important, The 
Movies, unlike Stunt Island, allows players to export movies so they can edit their 
ﬁ lms using external tools such as Adobe Premiere Pro. The movies in Stunt Island
can be viewed only within the game itself and can not be exported because the 
game does not actually capture the images but simply re-creates the scene using
the game engine for each viewing.
The Movies offers more expressive power than any other storytelling game yet 
made, but it does require a lot of effort from the players. If you want to make a 
game with similar features, you will have to work with the programmers to design 
a system that allows players to set up cameras in the game world, record the images 
and sounds generated by the game engine, and edit them.
However, you don’t have to go that far. The Sims proved to be a huge success with a 
much simpler storytelling mechanism: Players can create characters and construct 
houses for them to live in and then initiate events by giving commands to the 
characters. The Sims also lets players capture screen shots from the game, put cap-
tions under them, organize them into storyboards, and upload them to a web site 
for others to see. Telling stories this way requires much less complex software than 
The Movies uses, and the players don’t have to know how to edit video.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

124 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
An even easier solution involves generating a log of the player’s activities in text 
form. She can then edit this log any way she likes, turning her raw game actions 
and dialog into narrative form.
Game Modiﬁ cations
To give your players the utmost creative freedom with your game, you can permit 
them to modify the game itself—to redesign it themselves. Game modiﬁ cations, or 
mods, are extremely popular with the hardcore gamer community and almost an 
obligatory feature of any large multiplayer networked game (apart from server-
based games such as World of Warcraft).
Providing the player with mod-building tools also makes good business sense. Your 
game’s original content can keep people interested for only a certain amount of 
time, but if people can build mods that use your game engine (as they can with the 
Unreal and Half-Life 2 engines), people will continue to buy your game just to be 
able to play the mods.
Allowing for mods is more of a programmer’s problem than a designer’s problem, 
so this book does not discuss them in much detail.
Level Editors
A level editor allows players to construct their own levels for a game. Some level 
editors permit players only to deﬁ ne a new landscape; others allow them to deﬁ ne 
new characters as well; and a few go so far as to permit rebuilding the entire game. 
Generally, however, a good level editor lets the player construct a completely new 
landscape, place challenges in it, and write scripts that the game engine can oper-
ate. If you work on a large game for commercial sale, your team will almost 
certainly include tools programmers who will build a level editor for the level 
designers to use. To make the level editor available to the players, rather than useful 
only as an in-house tool, you must make sure it is as robust and well designed as 
the game software itself. Two superb level editors that you should study are the 2D 
StarCraft Campaign Editor, which is included with StarCraft, and the Hammer 3D 
editor that comes with Half-Life 2. For further reading about level editors and other 
design tools, see Richard Rouse’s article “Designing Design Tools” in the Gamasutra
developers’ webzine (Rouse, 2000).
Bots
A bot is an artiﬁ cially intelligent opponent that the player can program for himself. 
(Bot also has a secondary meaning: a program that help players cheat at multiplayer 
networked games. This section is about the other kind.) By building bots, players 
can create tougher and smarter opponents than those that normally ship with the 
game (usually a ﬁ rst-person shooter). Some players use bots as sparring partners for 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

