126 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
player can use the item he constructs to earn money. Your instructor will inform 
you of the scope of the exercise.
3. Choose a domain in which the player must construct something to meet an 
aesthetic standard for which a known set of aesthetic rules exists in the real world, 
such as architecture, clothing design, music, interior decoration, landscaping, or 
a domain that your instructor assigns. Research your chosen domain to learn its 
aesthetic rules. (Because many such rules change over time, you may choose a period 
from history if you can ﬁ nd adequate documentation.) Be careful not to confuse 
rules about usability with those about aesthetics. Write a short paper explaining 
your domain, including the range of choices that the player may make in construct-
ing something, and document the aesthetic rules. Provide references to your sources.
Design Practice QUESTIONS
1. What features do you want to include to allow the player to deﬁ ne herself in the 
game: avatar selection, customization, or creation from the ground up? What attri-
butes can she change, if any?
2. How will you make clear to the player the possible consequences of his avatar 
customization decisions so that he can make informed choices? Where will you 
provide this information?
3. If you offer creative play, what will its domain be? What limitations will the 
machine impose?
4. Do you plan to offer constrained creative play? If so, what will be the constrain-
ing factor or factors—economics, physics, or aesthetics? Will the game provide a 
growth path to gradually free the player of constraints? In the case of aesthetics, 
how will you implement an aesthetic judgment mechanism, and how will the 
results of that judgment become clear to the player? Will aesthetically appealing 
creations earn more money, win prizes, produce points, or gain some other reward?
5. Will you offer freeform creative play? If so, will it be part of ordinary play, or 
will it be a separate sandbox mode? If you do offer freeform creative play, can the 
player’s creations affect the gameplay?
6. Does your game include features for storytelling play? What will they be? How 
can you seamlessly integrate such features into the rest of the game?
7. Do you plan to allow mods? What will you let players modify? Can they create 
new levels, bots, or narrative material? What tools will you want to ship to support 
these activities?
8. How will you create a sense of community between the players and allow them 
to share their creations with others?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 CHAPTER 6
127
Character Development
It is our choices, Harry, that show what we truly are, far more than our abilities.
—J. K. ROWLING, HARRY POTTER AND THE CHAMBER OF SECRETS
Character design is an important aspect of telling stories and evoking an emotional 
response in both stories and games. Whether it’s based on the visual look of the 
character or the emotional depth of the back story, the character we play and 
those we interact with help make the game world believable to us. Heroes, villains, 
innocents in distress, and bystanders: Without these characters to carry us forward, 
the game would be an empty shell.
This chapter looks at how to design compelling and believable characters. We’ll 
start by examining the characteristics of the avatar character, both player-designed 
and built-in. Next we’ll look at the issues inherent in gender-speciﬁ c character 
design, paying attention to the common game stereotypes you should avoid. We’ll 
also look at the attributes associated with characters—visual, behavioral, and audi-
ble—and how you can use them to design your own characters. We’ll also talk 
about the difference between art-driven character design and story-driven character 
design and why you might prefer one over the other. A section on the importance 
of good audio design for your characters concludes the chapter.
The Goals of Character Design
In many genres, games structure gameplay around characters. Action games (espe-
cially the ﬁ ghting and platform subgenres), adventure games, action-adventure 
hybrids, and role-playing games all use characters extensively to entertain. Players 
need well-designed characters to identify with and care about—heroes to cheer and 
villains to boo. The best games also include complex characters who aren’t heroes 
or villains but fall somewhere in between, characters designed to intrigue the 
player or make the player think. If characters aren’t interesting or appealing, the 
game is less enjoyable.
Many factors combine to determine the degree to which a character appeals to peo-
ple. A character need not be attractive in the conventional sense of being pleasant 
to look at, but he must be competently constructed—well drawn or well described. 
His various attributes should work together harmoniously; his body, clothing, 
voice, animations, facial expressions, and other characteristics should all join to 
express him and his role clearly to the player. (Disharmonious elements can be 
introduced for humor’s sake, however, as with the cute but foul-mouthed squirrel 
CHAPTER 6


--- PAGE BREAK ---

128 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
in the Conker series.) Characters should be distinctive rather than derivative. Even a 
stereotypical character should have something that sets him apart from others of 
the same type.
A good character should also be credible. Players come to know a character through 
her appearance and actions, and if that character then does something at odds with 
her apparent persona, players won’t believe it. An evil demon from the underworld 
can’t be seen worrying about orphans. For that matter, neither can James Bond. 
Simple characters must be consistent. Richer characters, with more human frailties, 
may be more inconsistent, but even so, players must feel that the character holds 
certain core values that she will not violate.
Avatar characters have an extra burden: The player must want to step into their 
shoes, to identify with them, and to play as them. The next section discusses ava-
tars in more detail.
Important business considerations enter into character design as well. Customers 
identify many games by their key characters; that’s why so many games take their 
name directly from their characters, from Pac-Man to the latest in the Ratchet & 
Clank series. Good characters occupy what the marketing people call mindshare,
consumer awareness of a product or brand. You can use the character in a book, 
movie, or TV series; you can sell clothes and toys based on a character; you can use 
a character to advertise other products. It’s more difﬁ cult to license a game’s world 
or its gameplay than its characters.
The goal of character design, then, is to create characters that people ﬁ nd appealing
(even if the character is a villain, like Darth Vader), that people can believe in, and 
that the player can identify with (particularly in the case of avatar characters). If 
possible, the character should do these things well enough, and be distinctive 
enough, to be highly memorable to the players.
The Relationship Between Player and Avatar
Lara Croft is attractive because of, not despite of, her glossy blankness—that hyper-perfect, 
shiny, computer look. She is an abstraction, an animated conglomeration of sexual and 
attitudinal signs—breasts, hotpants, shades, thigh holsters—whose very blankness 
encourages the viewer’s psychological projection. Beyond the bare facts of her biography, 
her perfect vacuity means we can make Lara Croft into whoever we want her to be.
—STEVEN POOLE, “LARA’S STORY”
The game industry uses the term avatar to refer to a character in a game who serves 
as a protagonist under the player’s control. (The original term is Sanskrit and in the 
Hindu religion refers to the bodily incarnation of a god.) Most action and action-
adventure games provide exactly one avatar. Many role-playing games allow the 
player to manage a party of characters and switch control from one to another, but 
if winning a role-playing game is contingent upon the survival of a particular 
TIP A good character 
is the most ﬁ nancially 
valuable part of any 
video game’s intellec-
tual property. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 
129
 CHAPTER 6
member of the party, then that character is effectively the player’s avatar (though 
some games require that more than one character survive). The player usually sees 
the avatar onscreen more than any other character if the game is presented in the 
third person. Displaying the avatar requires the largest number of animations, which 
must also be the smoothest animations, or you risk annoying the player. The avatar’s 
movements must be attractive, not clumsy, unless clumsiness is part of the avatar’s 
character.
The nature of the player’s relationship with the avatar varies considerably from 
game to game. Whether the player designed the avatar herself, whether the game 
displays the avatar as a visible and audible presence, how the player controls the 
avatar’s movements, and many other factors inﬂ uence that relationship.
Player-Designed Avatar Characters
While most games have an established character as the player’s avatar, role-playing 
games, especially multiplayer online ones, almost always give players considerable 
freedom to design an avatar to their own speciﬁ cations. They can choose the ava-
tar’s race, sex, body type, hair, clothing, and other physical attributes, as well as a 
large number of other details, such as strength and dexterity, that have a direct 
effect on the way the avatar performs in challenging situations. (For more informa-
tion on these attributes, see Chapter 15, “Role-Playing Games.”) Figure 6.1 shows 
an example character creation screen from The Lord of the Rings Online. In such 
games, the avatar is a sort of mask the player wears, a persona she adopts for the 
purposes of the game. Because the player herself designs the avatar, the avatar has 
no personality other than what the player chooses to create. In such games, then, 
your task as a game designer is not to create avatars for the players but to provide 
the necessary tools to allow players to create avatars for themselves. The more 
opportunities for personal expression you can offer, the more the players will enjoy 
exercising their creativity.
FIGURE 6.1
The Lord of the Rings Online
gives the player many 
options for designing her 
own avatar. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

130 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Speciﬁ c and Nonspeciﬁ c Avatars
In games in which the player does not get to design or choose an avatar but must 
use one supplied by the game, the relationship between the player and the avatar 
varies depending on how completely you, the designer, speciﬁ ed the avatar’s 
appearance and other qualities.
The earliest adventure games, which were text-based, were written as if the player 
himself inhabited the game world. However, because the game didn’t know anything 
about the player, it couldn’t depict him or say much about him. Such avatars were 
nonspeciﬁ c—that is, the designer didn’t specify anything about them. Myst is an 
early example of a graphical game with a nonspeciﬁ c avatar.
The nonspeciﬁ c avatar does not belong entirely to the past, however. Gordon 
Freeman, the hero of Half-Life, does not speak and is never even seen in the game 
(although he does appear on the box). The designers did this deliberately; Half-Life,
a ﬁ rst-person shooter in a world with no mirrors, offers Gordon as an empty shell 
for the player to inhabit.
However, game designers soon began to ﬁ nd this model too limiting. They wanted 
to develop games in which the avatar had a personality of his own and was some-
one who belonged in the game world rather than just being a visitor there. It’s 
awkward to write a story around a character whose personality the designer knows 
nothing about. Besides, designers often want to show the avatar on the screen. As 
soon as you depict a person visually, he begins to exhibit some individuality. 
Modern games with strong storylines use detailed characters who have histories 
and personalities of their own. Max Payne, the lead character in the series of the 
same name, comes equipped with a past and a number of personal relationships 
that affect his life. Nancy Drew from the many Nancy Drew games (and of course 
all the books that preceded them) is another good example. These are speciﬁ c ava-
tars, and the player’s relationship with them is more complex than it is with a 
nonspeciﬁ c avatar. The player is not the avatar—clearly the player is not Nancy 
Drew—yet the player controls the avatar, so in what sense is the avatar still Nancy 
Drew? With a speciﬁ c avatar, the player’s relationship to her is more like that of the 
reader’s relationship to the hero of a novel. The reader is not the hero, but the 
reader does identify with her: The reader wants to know what will happen to the 
hero, hopes that things will turn out well for her, and so on. The difference is that 
in a game, the player can help and guide the hero rather than just read about her. 
But—at least in some games—the speciﬁ c avatar is also free to reject the player’s 
guidance. If the player asks April Ryan (from The Longest Journey) to do something 
dangerous, she refuses with comments such as, “That doesn’t seem like a good 
idea.” Speciﬁ c avatars sometimes have minds of their own.
Between the two extremes of nonspeciﬁ c and speciﬁ c avatars lies a middle ground in 
which the avatar is only partially characterized—speciﬁ ed to a certain degree but not 
fully detailed. For many games, especially those without strong stories, it’s better to 
create the avatar as a sort of cartoonish ﬁ gure (even if he’s depicted realistically). Many 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 
131
 CHAPTER 6
avatars in action games ﬁ t this description. Mario isn’t a real plumber, he’s a cartoon 
plumber in the same way that Bugs Bunny is a cartoon rabbit rather than a real one. 
Lara Croft, too, has more looks than personality; she’s a stand-in for the player, not a 
three-dimensional human being. Generally speaking, the more perfectly photorealistic 
a character is, the more the players will tend to regard him or her as someone other 
than themselves, an independent human being, and expect them to behave as such. 
This isn’t always a good thing, as it causes players to exercise more critical judgment 
than we might want them to. Nobody objects to a cartoon plumber jumping on car-
toon turtles, but they probably would if both Mario and the turtles were photorealistic. 
The Effects of Different Control Mechanisms
The way a player feels about an avatar depends somewhat on how the player con-
trols the avatar in the game. In the case of Nancy Drew and the avatars in all other 
point-and-click adventure and computer role-playing games, the player’s control is 
indirect; he doesn’t steer the avatar around but points to where he wants the avatar 
to go, and the avatar walks there of her own accord. The player feels more like a dis-
embodied guide and friend than a personal inhabitant of the game world.
Lara Croft and Mario, in contrast, are under direct control: The player steers their 
bodies through the game world, running, swimming, jumping, and ﬁ ghting as nec-
essary. The player becomes them and revels in the abilities that they have that he 
does not. But he doesn’t worry too much about their feelings. That’s partly because 
Lara and Mario are only partially speciﬁ ed, but it’s also because exercising so much 
control makes them more like puppets than people.
Male and Female Players and Characters
Early in the history of video games, some designers were concerned that male players 
(who used to make up the majority of the market) would be unwilling to play female 
avatars: Men might ﬁ nd identifying with a female character somehow threatening. 
Lara Croft (Figure 6.2) demonstrated that this is not a problem, at least as long as the 
character is acting in a role that men are comfortable with. Lara engages in tradition-
ally masculine activities, so men are happy to enter the game as Lara. They might be less 
comfortable with an avatar who engaged in more traditionally feminine activities.
Women, of course, are expected to identify with male heroes routinely, a state of 
affairs predating computer games. Until recently, few books, movies, TV shows, or 
video games about adventurous activities featured female heroes, and they’re still 
very much in the minority. Women justiﬁ ably get tired of playing male heroes, and 
they appreciate the opportunity to play as female characters. At the same time, 
however, women aren’t that interested in playing male-fantasy characters like Rayne 
from the BloodRayne series; such characters are so extreme that it discourages identi-
ﬁ cation with them. Heather from Silent Hill 3 (Figure 6.3) provides a better example; 
she looks like a real woman, not a walking lingerie advertisement. The Appendix, 
“Designing to Appeal to Particular Groups,” addresses this issue further.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

132 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
FIGURE 6.2
Lara Croft (seen here in 
Tomb Raider: 
Underworld) is adven-
turous but 
hypersexualized. 
FIGURE 6.3
Heather, from Silent 
Hill 3, looks like a 
real person. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 
133
 CHAPTER 6
In general, male players don’t actually identify with their avatars as much as female 
players do. Men are more willing to take the default avatar provided by the game 
and happily run with it. Women tend to see an avatar as an extension of their own 
personalities and an opportunity for self-expression. One of the best things you 
can do to make your game more attractive to female players is to permit them to 
customize the avatar—to choose his or her clothes, accessories, and weapons (if 
any). Role-playing games, especially online ones, offer some of the most powerful 
customization features.
When possible, it’s nice to give the player a choice of male or female avatars, but 
this is seldom practical in games with complex storylines. Writing material that 
works with either sex can be difﬁ cult, and doing so requires creating more content, 
which costs more money.
Designing Your Avatar Character
As you design the avatar for your game, think about how you want the player to 
relate to him. Do you want an entirely nonspeciﬁ c avatar, really no more than a 
control mechanism for the player; a partially-speciﬁ ed avatar, which the player sees 
and knows a little about, but who doesn’t have an inner life; or a fully speciﬁ ed 
avatar, separate from the player, an individual with a personality of his own? The 
more detail you supply, the more independent your avatar will be. Consider psy-
chological and social detail as well as visual detail. How much will he talk? The 
more a person talks, the more we know about him; the more we know, the more he 
becomes differentiated from us. Gordon Freeman never talks; Mario and Lara Croft 
don’t talk much; April Ryan talks a lot. Gordon is the player; Mario and Lara are 
representatives of the player; April is a person in her own right.
Also think about how the player will control your avatar: directly or indirectly? 
Your decision will have a profound impact on the player’s identiﬁ cation with the 
avatar. With indirect control, the avatar is distinctly someone else, with a mind of 
his own; with direct control, the avatar is to some degree a puppet. Your job is to 
ﬁ nd the right balance for each particular game, to create an avatar whose character-
istics serve your goals for the player-avatar relationship.
Design an interesting and likeable avatar using the techniques introduced in this 
chapter. The player will see the avatar all the time; it must be a character the player 
can identify with and must possess qualities he is likely to appreciate, such as brav-
ery, intelligence, decency, and a sense of humor.
Worst of all would be to create an avatar with qualities that players actively dislike. 
Squall Leonhart, the protagonist of Final Fantasy VIII, seemed at ﬁ rst to be self-
absorbed and obnoxious, and those players who weren’t willing to put up with his 
attitude stopped playing the game. This is one reason designers make games with 
only semispeciﬁ c characters. Link, from the Zelda series, is a semispeciﬁ c character 
(though perhaps a little more detailed than Mario). We don’t know enough about 
Link to form much of an opinion of his character, either positive or negative.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

134 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Visual Appearances
In modern video games, almost all the characters have a visible manifestation in 
the game. The exceptions are nonspeciﬁ c avatars who view the world only in the 
ﬁ rst-person perspective (like Gordon Freeman) and disembodied characters who 
sometimes speak to the character (via headphones, telepathy, or other means) but 
are never seen. In all other cases, you will need to display your characters, and the 
way those characters look will have an enormous impact on the way players feel 
about them.
Many designers, especially those who are visually inclined, start to create a charac-
ter by thinking about her visual appearance ﬁ rst. If the character doesn’t exhibit a 
complex personality and she doesn’t change much during the course of the game—
either behaviorally or visually—then this is often the best way to do it. Such an 
approach is called art-driven character design. It works well for games with fairly sim-
ple, cartoonlike characters. Art-driven design also makes a lot of sense if you hope 
to exploit the character in a number of other media besides video games: comic 
books and toys, for example.
Story-driven character design, an alternative to art-driven, is deﬁ ned in the section 
that follows this. You will use both visual and behavioral design techniques when 
creating your character, but every designer works well with one design develop-
ment pattern as a primary approach.
Character Physical Types
We’ll begin with the basic body types of game characters, and some of the ways 
that they may be depicted.
HUMANOIDS, NONHUMANOIDS, AND HYBRIDS
Characters in video games fall into three general categories: human or humanoid; 
nonhumanoid; and hybrids. (A small number of characters appear as disembodied 
voices or animate objects, but they aren’t included here because this section is spe-
ciﬁ cally about visual design.) Humanoid characters have two arms, two legs, and 
one head, and their bodies and faces are organized like a human’s. The more you 
deviate from this arrangement, the less human a character seems. Truly human 
characters can have either realistic human proportions or exaggerated ones in a 
cartoon style, but if you use cartoon proportions, you should use a cartoon drawing 
style as well. A photorealistic human with exaggerated proportions will read as dis-
turbingly deformed.
Nonhumanoid characters include those shaped like vehicles or machines (often 
indicated by the presence of metal and wheels), animals, or monsters. In the Star 
Wars universe, R2-D2 is clearly a machine, albeit one with endearing qualities. R2 
has three legs with wheels on the bottom, a variety of mechanical appendages, and 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 
135
 CHAPTER 6
a head, but no real face. The Daleks of Doctor Who are also machines, at least as 
seen from the outside, for similar reasons. Animals, even imaginary ones, look 
organic; the presence of wings or more than two legs distinguishes them from 
humanoids. Skin covered with fur, scales, or feathers further sets them apart. Many 
video game characters, such as Crash Bandicoot, have animal-like heads but humanoid
bodies; they’re still classiﬁ ed as humanoids rather than animals. Designers often 
modify the faces of animal-like humanoids, shortening the muzzle and bringing 
the eyes to the front, to make them more like humans as well.
Monsters are distinguished by such characteristics as signiﬁ cantly asymmetric bod-
ies, a different facial arrangement (eyes below the nose or jaws that move sideways, 
for example), and extreme proportions. Many of their qualities are borrowed from 
orders of animals that humans in some societies ﬁ nd frightening or repulsive: rep-
tiles, insects, and the more bizarre sea creatures. Claws, fangs, oozing slime, and an 
armorlike exoskeleton all add to a monster’s appearance of alienness and danger. 
The creature from the Alien movies exhibited all of these distinguishing features.
Hybrids include beings such as mermaids or human/machine combinations. 
Davros, the creator of the Daleks, has a humanoid torso and head but a mechanical 
bottom half. The Borg from Star Trek and C-3PO from Star Wars read as humanoids 
rather than true hybrids, however, because they still follow the rules for humans: 
two arms, two legs, and one head in the appropriate conﬁ guration. Cylons, from 
the popular Battlestar Galactica series, are hybrid machines/humans. In the latest 
incarnation of this show, they push the boundaries of how visuals can deceive the 
viewer as to what is human and what is not.
CARTOONLIKE QUALITIES
Relatively few art-driven characters are drawn with ordinary proportions or with 
photorealistic features. Rather, they are exaggerated in various ways that should be 
familiar to you from comic books and cartoons. These exaggerations serve as con-
venient symbols to indicate a character stereotype. Four of the most common are 
cool, tough, cute, and goofy. A character isn’t always limited to one of these qualities, 
however; he can sometimes shift from one to another as circumstances require.
■ Cool characters never get too upset about anything. The essence of cool is 
detachment. If something irritates them, it’s only for a moment. A rebellious atti-
tude toward authority often accompanies cool. Cool characters often wear sunglasses
and their body language is languid; when not doing anything else, they slouch. 
Frequently clever or wisecracking, cool characters may, depending on the situation, 
use their wits rather than brute force to overcome an obstacle. Ratchet, from the 
Ratchet & Clank series, exempliﬁ es the cool character. Though cool characters are 
often drawn as insouciant when standing still, their game actions (jumping, run-
ning) are usually fast and focused.
■ Tough characters exemplify physical aggression. Often male—although Lara 
Croft would be classed as a tough character—they are frequently drawn with 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

136 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
exaggerated height and bulk. They use large, expansive gestures and tend to talk 
with their ﬁ sts. Tough characters are frequently hypersexualized as well (see the next 
section). Ryu, from the Street Fighter series, is a tough character. Yosemite Sam is a 
tough character whose small stature leavens his toughness with a comic quality. 
Animations for tough characters are usually big and abrupt, fast moving and 
aggressive. Postures that lean forward, implying motion and action even where 
there is none, are common.
■ Cute characters are drawn with the proportions of human babies or baby ani-
mals: large eyes and oversized heads. They have rounded rather than angular 
bodies, dress in light colors, and have a general demeanor of cheerfulness, although 
they may exhibit moments of irritation or determination. Mario is the ultimate 
cute video game character. Animations of cute characters usually allow characters 
to achieve things that they physically could not accomplish in the real world: 
jumping wide gaps, climbing long ropes, ﬁ ring weapons larger than themselves. 
They usually look innocent and detached.
■ Goofy characters have slightly odd proportions and funny-looking, inefﬁ cient 
walks and other movements. Their behavior is largely comedic. Like cool charac-
ters, they are seldom upset by anything for long, but their physical awkwardness 
means that they are deﬁ nitely not cool. The Disney character named Goofy is
a perfect example; among video games, Crash Bandicoot is a goofy character. 
Animations for a goofy character in a game sometimes include the gooﬁ ness, as 
long as it doesn’t affect the player’s experience of the play. Tripping while running 
can be humorous, but if the character dies because of the visual joke, the player 
won’t appreciate it. Instead, save the humor for cut-scenes or idle moments where 
there is no game impact.
These are of course far from all the cartoonlike character types possible; consider the 
mock-heroism of Dudley Do-Right and George of the Jungle, the twisted evil of the 
witch in Snow White, and so on. Figure 6.4 shows a variety of cartoonlike characters.
Note that for the most part, these are Western classiﬁ cations. Art styles vary wildly 
among different cultures, particularly for characters. Japanese animation often uses 
large eyes and tiny mouths for characters, but the mouths sometimes swell to huge 
sizes when they shout, which looks grotesque to Americans. The animé style also 
sometimes gives cute childlike faces to sexually provocative women, producing—to 
Western eyes at least—somewhat disturbing results. European cartoon characters 
often seem ugly and strange to Americans, too. Asterix and Tintin, two exceptions, 
enjoy huge worldwide success. If you want your game to sell in a number of differ-
ent countries, study those countries’ native cartoon and comic styles closely to make 
sure you don’t violate local expectations.
The design of art-driven characters depends considerably on the target audience. 
For example, the adjectives cute and scary mean different things to a 5-year-old and 
a 25-year-old. Doom-style monsters certainly won’t go down well in a Mario-esque 
adventure.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 
137
 CHAPTER 6
COOL WITHOUT ATTITUDE
Kids hate goody-two-shoes characters just as much as parents dislike characters with 
foul attitudes—but just because a character doesn’t cop an attitude with authority ﬁ g-
ures doesn’t make him a goody-two-shoes. The Scooby Doo kids provide a pretty good 
example of characters who retain their appeal with kids despite not being rebellious. 
Kids like to identify with the characters’ intelligence, bravery, and resourcefulness. 
Scooby is funny, too, because despite his large size, he is a coward. But because he’s a 
dog and not a child, Scooby doesn’t get picked on or treated with contempt for being 
scared. This is a very clever piece of character design: Children know that no matter how 
scary the situation is, Scooby is even more scared than they are, so they can feel virtuous 
for being braver than he is.
Conker’s Bad Fur Day presented an interesting twist on this rule. Rare, the game’s 
developer, transplanted their cute children’s characters into a game for adults (or 
rather, adolescent boys), full of bad language and vulgar jokes. But it’s a one-way 
transformation; you wouldn’t want to insert the jokes into a game genuinely 
intended for children.
HYPERSEXUALIZED CHARACTERS
Hypersexualization refers to the practice of exaggerating the sexual attributes of 
men and women in order to make them more sexually appealing, at least to 
FIGURE 6.4
Several cartoon 
characters from 
video games and 
other media


--- PAGE BREAK ---

138 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
teenagers. Male characters get extra-broad chests and shoulders, huge muscles, 
prominent jaws, and oversized hands and feet. Female characters get enormous 
breasts, extremely narrow waists, and wide hips. Skimpy clothing lets them display 
their physical attributes as much as possible, and sexually suggestive poses further 
drive the point home (as if there were any doubt). Both sexes boast unrealistic 
height, with heads that seem disproportionately small and with extra-long legs. 
High heels often further exaggerate women’s height.
Kratos, from the God of War games, typiﬁ es the hypersexualized male character,
as do most of the male characters in ﬁ ghting games. Lara Croft is the best-known 
example of a hypersexualized female character among the hundreds populating 
any number of video games. Comic book superheroes (male and female) are also 
traditionally hypersexualized, a quality that got comic books into trouble with the 
U.S. Congress in the 1950s.
Such characters obviously sell well to young men and teenage boys, but by now 
these images are clichéd. So many stereotypical he-men and babes have been cre-
ated over the years that it’s difﬁ cult to tell them apart, and any new game that 
relies on such images runs the risk of being lumped in with all the others. This
may actually obscure any technological or game design advances you have made. 
Finally, hypersexualized characters really appeal only to a puerile audience. They 
actively discourage older players, who’ve seen it all before, and female players. Strip 
clubs are male preserves; a character that looks as if she just stepped out of one 
sends clear signals that female players are not wanted or welcome. (To give her her 
due, Lara Croft’s hiking boots, backpack, and khaki clothing do set her apart from 
the common run of women clad in chain mail bikinis or skintight leather.)
In short, avoid hypersexualizing characters just for their titillation value. It limits 
your market and seldom adds much. You might get away with it if it’s intentionally 
done for laughs; putting Cate Archer into a 1960s retro catsuit worked out well for 
the designers of No One Lives Forever because of the game’s humorous context. But 
No One Lives Forever was also an excellent game in its own right. Big breasts won’t 
sell a poor game, as the developers of Space Bunnies Must Die! discovered.
Clothing, Weapons, Symbolic Objects, and Names
When designing ordinary human beings, body shape is only the beginning. In
the real world, we have only a limited ability to change our bodies, so instead we 
express our personal style through things that we hang on the outsides of our
bodies: clothing and accessories. In a video game, the player can more easily see 
who is who—especially important in situations requiring snap decisions, like a 
shooter game—if characters’ clothing and props uniquely identify them. Indiana 
Jones wears a certain hat and khaki clothes, and he carries a bullwhip. Darth 
Vader’s ﬂ owing black cape, forbidding helmet, and even the sound of his breathing 
instantly set him apart from everyone else in the Star Wars universe. Crucial for 
avatars, this rule applies to a lesser extent to minor characters.
NOTE In 1954, 
American psychiatrist 
Frederic Wertham 
published a book 
titled Seduction of 
the Innocent, in which 
he alleged the bulging 
muscles and tight 
clothing of comic-
book superheroes 
promoted homosexu-
ality and that Wonder 
Woman’s strength 
and independence 
meant that she must 
be a lesbian. Following 
Congressional investi-
gations, the American 
comics industry self-
censored its products 
for many years.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 
139
 CHAPTER 6
CONCEPT ART AND MODEL SHEETS
Concept art consists of drawings made early in the design process to give people an idea 
of what something in the game will look like—most often, a character. Many people 
involved in the game design, development, and production process will need such pic-
tures. This includes everyone from the programmers (who might need to see a vehicle 
before they can correctly model its performance characteristics in software) to the mar-
keting department (who will want to know what images they can use to help sell the 
game). By creating a number of different versions of a character, you can compare their 
different qualities and choose the one you like the best to be implemented by the game’s 
modeling and animation teams.
Concept art shouldn’t take too long to draw—minutes, not hours. The object isn’t to pro-
duce ﬁ nal artwork; the concept drawings shouldn’t end up in the ﬁ nal product at all. 
Rather, its purpose is to explain and inspire.
Figure 6.5 shows a character drawn by artist Björn Hurri. Told only to draw an imaginary 
Mongol horsewoman as the hero of an action-adventure game, and without any reference 
materials, he made a number of key decisions about her age, features, clothing, and 
weapons, all of which are visible in the picture. Her emotional temperament comes 
through in the image as well—this is not a woman to be triﬂ ed with. Good concept art 
like this deﬁ nitely bears out the old adage that a picture is worth a thousand words.
FIGURE 6.5
Concept art of a 
fantasy Mongol 
horsewoman. 
Courtesy of Björn Hurri.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

140 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Another visualization tool that you should consider using is the model sheet, a traditional 
animator’s device. A model sheet shows a number of different poses for a single charac-
ter all on one page, representing different emotions and attitudes through his or her 
facial expression and body language. This lets you compare one with another and gives 
you more of an overall feel for the character than a single image can do. Figure 6.6 is a 
model sheet from The Act, a coin-op game by Cecropia Inc. that uses hand-drawn 
animation.
A character’s choice of weapons tells a lot about him, too. On the one hand, a meat 
cleaver or an axe is a tool repurposed for use as a weapon, so it suggests crude and 
bloody, violence. On the other hand, a rapier’s thin elegance suggests a dueling aris-
tocrat. Indiana Jones can use his bullwhip to get himself out of all kinds of scrapes; 
it’s a symbol of his resourcefulness. That he generally prefers the nonlethal bull-
whip and carries a pistol only as a backup (in the movies, anyway) sends the 
message that he’d rather not kill if he doesn’t have to.
Hairstyles and jewelry tend to remain the same in games even when clothing 
changes. Both function as good identiﬁ ers if you make them visible and distinctive 
enough. Jewelry, in particular, has a long history of magic, meaning, or mysticism: 
consider the signiﬁ cance of wedding rings, military medals, the cruciﬁ xes of 
FIGURE 6.6
A model sheet of the Edgar character from The Act. 
Copyright © 2005 by Cecropia Inc. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 
141
 CHAPTER 6
Christianity, and the steel bracelets of the Sikhs. If you want a magical power or 
status transferred to another character, you can easily do it by transferring a crown, 
ring or chain of gold, or gems. You don’t necessarily have to give jewelry a mean-
ing; as long as it’s visually distinctive, it will help to identify the character and 
deﬁ ne his style.
DESIGN RULE Don’t Add Too Much Detail
Don’t overwork a character by adding too many distinctive visual features. Two or three is 
usually enough—more than that and he will start to look ridiculous. 
You can also give your characters distinctive names and ethnicities if appropriate. 
Consider how the men of Sergeant Rock’s Easy Company in the old DC Comics 
World War II series reﬂ ected the ethnic diversity of America with names such as 
Dino Manelli, Izzy Cohen, and “Reb” Farmer—not to mention the square-jawed 
American hero, Sgt. Frank Rock.
There is a ﬂ ip side to using such obvious names. Naming your characters in such
a fashion lends them a cartoonlike style. This may be exactly what you need for 
some games, but for others it is not necessarily such a good ﬁ t. If realism is your 
aim, for instance, then such an unrealistic collection of names, each obviously
chosen to represent an ethnicity or a stereotypical group, cheapens the ﬁ nal result. 
Names do not have to spell out explicitly the character’s persona. The name of 
Sylvester Boots, the hero of Anachronox, says little or nothing about his personality, 
though his nickname, Sly, is altogether more revealing. Lara Croft’s name, although 
it does not immediately seem to indicate anything about the character, does (to 
English sensibilities, at least) imply a degree of upper-class Englishness.
Color Palette
As you work on your character’s appearance, also think about creating a color pal-
ette for him—speciﬁ cally, for his clothing. People in games seldom change clothes, 
which saves money on art development and helps to keep them visually distinc-
tive. In the early Tomb Raider games, Lara Croft wore a teal-colored shirt unique
to her; no other object or character used that color. If you spotted teal, you’d
found Lara. Comic-book superheroes furnish another particularly strong example. 
Superman wears a lot of red in his cape, boots, and shorts; blue in his suit; and a 
small amount of yellow in his belt and S logo. Batman wears dark blue, black, and 
again a small amount of yellow as the background to his logo. Characters can share 
a palette if the proportions of the colors vary from individual to individual.
Choose your color palette to reﬂ ect your character’s attitudes and emotional temper-
ament. As upholder of “truth, justice, and the American way,” Superman’s colors are 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

142 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
bright and cheery; the red and blue of his uniform recall the American ﬂ ag. Batman, 
the Dark Knight of Gotham City—a much grittier, more run-down place than 
Superman’s Metropolis—dresses in more somber colors.
Sidekicks
Hero characters are sometimes accompanied by sidekicks. A tough hero may travel 
with a cute sidekick (or vice versa) to provide some variety and comic relief. The 
cheerful look of Miles “Tails” Prower, the two-tailed fox who accompanies Sonic 
the Hedgehog, complements Sonic’s expression of determination and mischief. 
Sidekicks appear in many action games: Jak and Daxter, Ratchet & Clank, and so on. 
Link from the Zelda series has had various sidekicks. Banjo and Kazooie were, in 
Banjo-Kazooie, really only one avatar; they could only work together (Kazooie rode 
around inside Banjo’s backpack). Later in the series, they began to operate indepen-
dently some of the time.
Sidekicks offer several beneﬁ ts. They allow you to give the player additional moves 
and other actions that would not be believable in a single character; they extend 
the emotional range of the game by showing the player a character with a different 
personality from the hero; and they can give the player information she wouldn’t 
necessarily get any other way. Link’s fairy in The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time,
for example, doesn’t do very much, but she offers valuable advice at key points in 
the game.
Additional Visual Design Resources
This is not a book about drawing or modeling, so it can’t address the actual tech-
niques of creating character artwork. However, these crafts are an essential part of 
the process of character design, especially if you prefer the art-driven approach. If 
you would like to know more, consult Game Character Development with Maya, by 
Antony Ward (Ward, 2004), and Digital Character Animation 3, by George Maestri 
(Maestri, 2006).
You don’t have to purchase expensive software to learn to draw and model charac-
ters. There are many free tools available. Among the best are GIMP, the GNU Image 
Manipulation Program, for editing bitmap pictures; Inkscape, for editing vector 
graphics (line drawings); and Blender, a 3D modeling tool that approaches the 
quality of some packages costing thousands of dollars. 
Character Depth
The visual appearance of a character makes the most immediate impact on the 
player, and you can convey a lot of information about the character through his 
appearance, but you can’t convey everything. Nor does his appearance necessarily 
determine what role he will play in a story, how he will behave in different 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 
143
 CHAPTER 6
situations, or how he will interact with the game’s core mechanics. To address 
those issues, you have to give your attention to deeper questions about who the 
character is and how he behaves.
If you begin your character design with the character’s role, personality, and
behavior rather than his appearance, you are doing story-driven character design. In 
story-driven design, you decide these things ﬁ rst and only then let the artists begin 
to develop a physical appearance for the character. Artists often like to work from a 
detailed description; it helps them to understand and visualize the character.
Even games that you would not expect to have fully developed characters can gain 
much by including them. Consider the multiformat title SSX Tricky, shown in Figure 
6.7. This is an extreme sports snowboarding game that pays attention to character 
development. The player can make friends, foster rivalries, and enhance her charac-
ter throughout the game. The addition of these storylike elements makes it more 
than a simple sports game. The player chooses a character and begins to identify with 
her. This creates a greater sense of immersion in the game, and best of all, it’s not 
prescripted. The player chooses her own friends—or enemies—from the other char-
acters at will, and her choices do affect the gameplay. You can be sure that the 
people you antagonize will try their hardest to sabotage your run, and there will be 
a few sharp words exchanged at the ﬁ nish line.
Admittedly, it’s not complex interpersonal interaction, and it could be taken fur-
ther, but it’s refreshing to see real character development attempted in the sort of 
games for which it has never before been considered. Interaction between charac-
ters is one of the most interesting aspects of stories—sometimes more so than the 
actual plot. Although a plot details the path of a story (which is covered in the next 
chapter), the characters’ interactions add the ﬂ avor and subtlety that differentiate a 
well-crafted story from a ﬁ fth-grade English composition assignment.
FIGURE 6.7
SSX Tricky is a sports 
game that includes 
real character 
development. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

144 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Role, Attitudes, and Values
Every character in a story plays a role, just as every character in a movie plays a role 
even if only as an extra. The moment a character appears for any reason, the audi-
ence needs to know something about him. For minor characters, appearance and 
voice may convey all the information the audience needs—we don’t need a detailed 
biography of the coffee-shop waitress who only appears for 30 seconds.
Major characters need richer personalities, however, and to design them you will 
have to envision the character in your head and then answer a large number of 
questions about them. In his 2001 article “Building Character: An Analysis of 
Character Creation,” designer Steve Meretzky recommends that you create a char-
acter background paper, or backgrounder, for each one. You don’t necessarily have
to write it in narrative form; lists of qualities will do. The main thing is to get the 
information down on paper so that it’s documented somewhere. Meretzky suggests 
that you consider the following:
Where was the character born?
What was his or her family life like 
as a kid?
What was his education?
Where does he live now?
Describe his job.
Describe his ﬁ nances.
Describe his taste in clothes, books, mov-
ies, etc.
What are his favorite foods?
What are his favorite activities?
What are his hobbies?
Describe any particular personality traits 
and how they manifest.
Is he shy or outgoing? 
Greedy or giving?
Does he have quirks?
Does he have superstitions?
Does he have phobias?
What were the traumatic moments 
in his life?
What were his biggest triumphs?
Describe his important past romances.
Describe his current romantic 
involvement or involvements.
How does he treat friends? Lovers? 
Bosses? Servants?
Describe his political beliefs, past 
and present.
Describe his religious beliefs, past 
and present.
What are his interesting or important 
possessions?
Does he have any pets?
Does he have unusual talents?
What’s the best thing that could 
happen to him?
The worst thing?
Does he drink tea or coffee?
Obviously, this list is intended primarily for documenting ordinary humans, not 
sentient robo-camels or creatures of the underworld; if you set your game in the 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 
145
 CHAPTER 6
realm of fantasy, you’ll have to adjust the list of considerations as necessary. But in 
all cases, your goal is to become the world expert on this character, to know every-
thing worth knowing about him. Try to imagine how he will behave in a variety of 
situations.
Once you know the answers to these questions, you can begin to think about how 
they will manifest themselves in your game’s story. If your character is slightly dis-
honest, say—a small-time crook but not a villain—how will you make this clear to 
the player? One of the cardinal rules of ﬁ ction writing is that you should show—
rather than tell—things about the characters to the reader. This goes double for 
video games, in which players expect to be interacting most of the time and show 
little tolerance for expository material. How, then, will you show your characters’ 
personalities? Consider these three factors: appearance, language, and behavior. The 
earlier section “Visual Appearances” deals with the ﬁ rst of these; the later section 
“Audio Desi gn” addresses language. Appearance and language quickly and directly 
establish character but may produce stereotypes if you’re not careful. The third
factor, behavior, is the most subtle way of conveying character to the audience. 
Appearances can be deceiving, and deeds matter more than words. But establishing 
character through behavior takes longer; you must give the player the opportunity 
to observe a character’s actions. What will your character do, what events might he 
get caught up in that will cause him to display his true nature?
Attributes
Chapter 5, “Creative and Expressive Play,” ﬁ rst introduced attributes, and this sec-
tion discusses attributes of characters. Attributes are the data values that describe a 
character in some way: her location, state of health, property, emotional condition, 
relationships with others, and so on. Attributes are symbolic or numerical variables 
that can change as the player plays the game. Functional attributes form part of the 
game’s core mechanics, but deciding on appropriate values is also a part of charac-
ter design.
Attributes can be divided into those that change frequently and by large amounts, 
and those that change infrequently and by only small amounts or not at all. The 
former are called status attributes because they give the current status of the charac-
ter, which can change often. The latter are called characterization attributes because 
they deﬁ ne the bedrock details of a character’s personality, which—unless the 
character is mentally ill—shouldn’t change much. These are not industry standard 
terms (the industry has not yet settled on a standard), but you should ﬁ nd them 
useful. In the Dungeons & Dragons universe, hit points (or health) is a status attri-
bute; it changes moment by moment during a ﬁ ght. Constitution is a characterization
attribute referring to the character’s overall degree of hardiness and resistance to 
injury or poison; it changes rarely or not at all.
In the past, most video games limited characters’ attributes to physical details such 
as their health and inventory. In recent years, more games have made an effort to 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

146 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
model social relationships and emotional states. The standout example of the latter 
is The Sims, a game simulating the behavior of people living in a suburban neigh-
borhood. A set of characterization attributes for each character (called a sim)
determines, in part, its afﬁ nity for other sims; those with conﬂ icting qualities 
won’t get along well if forced to interact. The original version of the game called 
those attributes neat, outgoing, active, playful, and nice. Status attributes named 
hunger, comfort, hygiene, bladder, energy, fun, social, and room represented sims’ 
personal needs, which could be met by directing them to perform appropriate 
activities (such as visiting a neighbor or taking a shower) or by improving their sur-
roundings. An overall happiness value went up or down depending on whether the 
sim’s needs were being met. Few games had ever bothered to measure their charac-
ters’ happiness before!
The Sims’s model was simple but more sophisticated than anything that had yet 
been tried. As games get more complex and their stories get richer, there will 
undoubtedly be much more detailed models of human emotional states and 
relationships.
Deﬁ ning your characters’ attributes is part of character design, but the attributes that 
a character needs depend entirely upon the genre and the nature of the gameplay. 
The chapters in Part Two, “The Genres of Games,” discuss the character attributes 
appropriate in each genre. 
Character Dimensionality
In everyday language, people often speak disparagingly of characters in books and 
movies as two-dimensional. By this they mean that the character isn’t very inter-
esting, doesn’t grow or change, doesn’t feel fully human, or adheres to a stereotype 
without any nuances. This criticism usually applies to heroes and villains; it’s not 
realistic to expect everyone who appears in a story to be a fully rounded character 
with his own quirks and foibles.
This book proposes a slightly more formal use of the idea of character dimensional-
ity, which may help you deﬁ ne characters for computer games. Characters may be 
classiﬁ ed into four groups: zero-, one-, two-, and three-dimensional. A character’s 
degree of emotional sophistication and the ways in which his behavior changes in 
response to emotional changes determine his degree of dimensionality. Here we’ll 
examine each group in terms of the kinds of characters found in The Lord of the 
Rings, simply because that story is so well known.
■ Zero-dimensional characters exhibit only discrete emotional states. A zero-
dimensional character may exhibit any number of such states, but there is no 
continuum of states; that is, the character’s emotional state never moves smoothly 
from one state into another or shows evidence of being in two states at the same 
time; there is no such thing as “mixed feelings.” The nameless orcs in The Lord of 
the Rings feel only two emotions: hate and fear. The orcs hate the heroes and attack 
NOTE Books and 
movies about small 
groups of people 
sometimes manage 
to achieve a thorough 
realization of virtually 
the entire cast of char-
acters; see Thornton 
Wilder’s The Bridge of 
San Luis Rey or Gabriel 
García Márquez’s One 
Hundred Years of Soli-
tude for examples.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 
147
 CHAPTER 6
whenever they feel they outnumber their enemies, and they fear the heroes and run
away whenever they feel vulnerable or outnumbered. This minimal level of emotional
variability is typical of the enemies in a simple shooter game (see Figure 6.8).
The emotional simplicity of zero-dimensional characters can make them comic. 
The characters in classic Warner Brothers cartoons—Bugs Bunny, Sylvester, and so 
on—change almost instantaneously from one extreme emotion to another.
■
One-dimensional characters have only a single variable to characterize a 
changing feeling or attitude; in other respects their character is largely ﬁ xed. In 
The Lord of the Rings, the dwarf Gimli is hostile and suspicious toward elves at ﬁ rst, 
but over time his respect for the elf Legolas grows until they are boon companions. 
His other attitudes don’t change much. The movies make him a more one-dimen-
sional character than the book does (see Figure 6.9).
■ Two-dimensional characters are described by multiple variables that express their 
impulses, but those impulses don’t conﬂ ict. Such variables are called orthogonal; that 
is, they describe completely different domains, which permits no emotional ambigu-
ity. In The Lord of the Rings, Denethor is a two-dimensional character. He has a variety 
of strong emotions—pride, contempt, despair—but he never faces a moral dilemma. 
His senses of duty and tradition trump all other considerations, even when they are 
wildly inappropriate (see Figure 6.10).
■ Three-dimensional characters have multiple emotional states that can produce 
conﬂ icting impulses. This state of affairs distresses and confuses them, sometimes 
causing them to behave in inconsistent ways. Most of the major characters in The 
Lord of the Rings are three-dimensional, especially those who are tempted by the 
Ring. Frodo and, above all, Gollum are three-dimensional; Gollum’s conﬂ icting 
desires have driven him mad (see Figure 6.11).
FIGURE 6.9
One-dimensional 
characters have a sin-
gle variable that 
describes an emotion 
that changes over time.
DISHONEST
OFFENSIVE
HONEST
POLITE
antipathy
HATE
sympathy
neutrality
LOVE
HATE
FEAR
FIGURE 6.10
Two-dimensional
characters have multi-
ple, non-conﬂ icting 
impulses.
FIGURE 6.8
Zero-dimensional 
characters have
binary emotional 
states with no mixed 
feelings. They may 
have more than two.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

148 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
If you plan to allow conﬂ icting emotional states to exist in a character, then you 
must decide how this conﬂ ict manifests itself so that the player perceives it. At any 
given time, one state will dominate, but if the character really is of two minds 
about something, his behavior may become erratic as one emotion dominates and 
then another. For example, a person doing something he really doesn’t want to do 
may be visibly reluctant, change his mind in the middle, or even subconsciously 
take some action that sabotages his own efforts. There isn’t space to discuss this 
issue in depth here, but you will have to think long and hard about how to portray 
your characters’ mixed feelings, and you should also discuss the problem with both 
your programmers (who will have to implement the necessary algorithms) and 
your artists (who will have to create animations showing, for example, reluctance 
or uncertainty).
Both the game industry and the playing public would beneﬁ t from more games 
with three-dimensional characters. April Ryan in The Longest Journey and The 
Nameless One in Planescape: Torment both face a number of moral dilemmas and 
questions about what it means to be who they are. This kind of writing helps to 
improve the public perception of our medium as an art form worthy of serious 
consideration.
Character Growth
If a game aspires to be more than a simple adventure, if it seeks to have a meaning-
ful story and not just a series of exciting episodes, then it must include character 
growth of some kind.
The way in which character growth takes place varies by genre. Action games typi-
cally restrict growth to new moves and new powerups; the character’s mental state 
does not change. Adventure games, which depend on strong characters and plots, 
allow for a more literary type of change: personal and emotional growth, unrelated 
to gameplay. Role-playing games focus on character growth as one of the game’s 
top-level challenges. Role-playing games offer several dimensions for growth:
FIGURE 6.11
Three-dimensional 
characters can have 
conﬂ icting impulses 
that produce inconsis-
tent behavior. 
antipathy
psychopathy
HATE
sympathy
neutrality
LOVE


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 
149
 CHAPTER 6
personal, if the story is rich enough; skills, such as the ability to use magic or
weapons; and strength, intelligence, or any number of such character attributes.
To build character growth into your game, you’ll have to decide which characters 
will grow (most often the hero, if there is one) and how they will grow. Physically? 
Intellectually? Morally? Emotionally? Games use physical growth, in abilities and 
powers, more than any other kind of growth because it is easy to implement and 
show to the player.
Then ask yourself how you will implement this growth within the game—through 
changes in numeric or symbolic attributes, or through changes in the plot of the 
story, or some other means? How will growth affect the gameplay, if at all? Finally, 
how will it be represented to the player? Some of your options include displaying 
numbers on the screen to show the growth (the crudest method), changing the 
character’s appearance, changing the actions available to the player if the character 
is an avatar, and showing that the character has matured by changing his language 
and behavior (a more subtle method).
Character Archetypes
In his book The Hero with a Thousand Faces (Campbell, 1972), folklore scholar 
Joseph Campbell identiﬁ ed a pattern that many stories follow, which he called the 
Hero’s Journey. Stories that follow this pattern frequently include archetypal charac-
ters—that is, characters of types that have been fundamental to storytelling since 
the days of myth, that are found in the stories of virtually all cultures, and that 
may even be fundamental to the human psyche. These characters assist or impede 
the hero in various ways on his journey. In Banjo-Kazooie, for example, Bottles the 
mole teaches the protagonists (and thereby the player) a number of things they 
need to know to fulﬁ ll their quest, so he ﬁ ts neatly into the archetype of the mentor
character. 
There isn’t room to discuss each of Campbell’s character archetypes here, but 
Christopher Vogler’s book The Writer’s Journey (Vogler, 1998) gives a condensed 
treatment of Joseph Campbell’s work for screenwriters and discusses archetypes in 
depth. For how to make best use of characters who represent these archetypes in 
your own games, refer to The Writer’s Journey.
You should not implement character archetypes slavishly, nor must a game have all 
or even any of them. Video games do not necessarily have to be heroic journeys, 
and good characters don’t have to ﬁ t into neat little boxes.
Audio Design
Audio design, both sound effects and language, is also a part of character design. 
You will need to work with your team’s audio director—and sometimes defer to her 
experience—to ﬁ nd the right effects and voice for your character.
NOTE The psychol-
ogist Carl Jung 
originated the concept 
of character archetypes, 
and although his work 
is increasingly out of 
fashion in psychological 
circles, students of the 
humanities and litera-
ture still ﬁ nd it useful.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

150 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Sound Effects and Music
The sounds a character makes tell us something about her personality, even if she 
doesn’t speak. Sounds—anything from a gunshot, to a shouted “Hi-yah!” accompa-
nying a karate chop, to a verbal “Aye, aye, sir”—conﬁ rm acceptance of the player’s 
command. Sounds also signal injury, damage, or death. The sound of a punch that 
we’re all familiar with from the movies is in fact quite unrealistic, but we’re used to 
it and we know what that THWAP! means when we hear it. Likewise, drowning 
people don’t really go “glug glug glug,” but that’s what we expect. Much of sound 
design involves meeting psychological expectations. Deep sounds suggest slow and 
strong characters; high sounds suggest light and fast ones. The tone of the sound a 
thing makes should conﬁ rm and harmonize with its visual texture: metallic objects 
make metallic sounds. As usual, however, incongruity can be funny, so you can mis-
match sounds and visuals on purpose for comedic effect. As you deﬁ ne your character’s 
movements and behaviors, think about what sounds should be associated with her.
As the audio gear in computers and home consoles has improved, game developers 
have begun to create musical themes associated with speciﬁ c characters, just as the 
movies have for decades. John Williams is a master at creating themes for ﬁ lm char-
acters and situations. Everyone remembers the themes from Star Wars: the Imperial 
March that accompanies Darth Vader, with its harsh, discordant trumpets; Princess 
Leia’s love theme; the main title theme that represents the Rebel Alliance generally. 
Even Jabba the Hutt has a theme. This book can’t teach you music composition, but 
you should be aware of certain common techniques. Evil or bizarre characters often 
get themes in a minor key; good or heroic ones get themes in a major key. Instruments 
playing in unison, especially to a monotonous rhythm, suggest enforced conformity, 
another characteristic of the Imperial March. These are, of course, traditional Western 
notions; music for an Indian audience would be different. However, Western domi-
nance of the video game industry has meant that even games made in Japan follow 
similar rules. The music from the Final Fantasy series has become particularly popular. 
If you’re involved in designing the game sounds and their technical implementa-
tion, be sure that you keep music, sound effects, and dialog or spoken narration in 
separate sound ﬁ les that the game mixes together during playback. This is impor-
tant for two reasons. First, if the game is ever localized into another language, it 
will be necessary to replace the spoken audio. If the dialog is already mixed into 
the music, the sound ﬁ les in the new language will have to be remixed with the 
music before they can be added to the game. It’s much easier just to drop in a new 
ﬁ le of spoken audio and let the game mix it.
Second, the music and sound effects should have separate volume controls in the 
game for the beneﬁ t of the hearing-impaired. Players with a condition called tinni-
tus ﬁ nd that music prevents them from hearing the sound effects properly, and 
that makes it more difﬁ cult to play the game. Keep the two separate so the players 
can turn the music off if they need to. For more on music and sound effects in 
video games, read Game Sound: An Introduction to the History, Theory, and Practice
of Video Game Music and Sound Design, by Karen Collins (Collins, 2008).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 
151
 CHAPTER 6
Voice and Language
The way a character speaks conveys an enormous amount of information. This 
breaks down into various elements:
■ Vocabulary indicates the age, social class, and level of education of the character. 
People who don’t read much seldom employ big vocabularies. Teenagers always use 
a slang vocabulary of their own in order to exclude adults. Beware, however: If you 
use too much current slang, your game will sound dated six months after publica-
tion. Conversely, period slang can help set a game in a different time—calling a gun 
a roscoe promptly suggests the hardboiled detective ﬁ ction of the 1930s and 1940s. 
In all cases, a light touch is best unless you’re deliberately trying to be funny.
■ Grammar and sentence construction also convey information about education 
and class; bad grammar reveals bad schooling. Although it’s not really valid, we 
associate articulateness and long, complex sentences with intelligence.
■ Accent initially tells us something about a person’s place of origin and social 
class. City people and country people speak differently the world over. Accent is 
also, unfortunately, thought of as an indicator of intelligence. (This can backﬁ re; 
smart lawyers from the American South occasionally play up their southern accents 
to fool their northern opponents into thinking they’re not as bright as they really 
are.) Avoid the “dumb redneck” stereotype; it is as offensive in its way as the “dumb 
Negro” stereotypes of 1930s radio plays were.
■ Delivery refers to the speed and tone of the person’s speech. Slow speech is—
again, mistakenly—often associated with a lack of intelligence, unless the speaker 
is an Eastern mystic, in which case slow speech can be mistaken for wisdom. Try to 
steer clear of stereotypes. Speed and tone can still work for you, indicating your 
characters’ excitement, boredom, anxiety, or suspicion. The speaker’s tone conveys 
an attitude or emotional state: friendly, hostile, cynical, guarded, and so on.
■ Vocal quirks include things like a stutter (Porky Pig), lisp (Sylvester the cat), and 
catchphrases that identify a character (“Eh… what’s up, doc?” from Bugs Bunny).
Consider how The Simpsons deﬁ nes its characters’ education, intelligence, and inter-
ests through language. Homer’s limited vocabulary and simple sentences show that 
he’s not well educated; the kinds of things he says indicate that his interests are 
chieﬂ y food and beer. Marge’s middle-sized vocabulary goes with her middle-class 
outlook on life; from her statements we see that she’s concerned with work, friends, 
and her children. Lisa is the scholar of the family, interested in reading, writing, 
and music; she has an unusually rich vocabulary for her age and speaks in long, 
complex sentences. Bart’s use of language varies considerably based on his situation, 
from moronically crude when he’s playing a practical joke to quite sophisticated 
when he’s making an ironic observation. Bart is a carefree hedonist but self-aware 
enough to know it and even comment on it. He’s a postmodern sort of character.
StarCraft, which draws on a variety of American accents to create several different 
types of characters, exhibits some of the most interesting uses of language in games 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

