154 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
7. What about the avatar will intrigue and interest the player?
8. What about the avatar will encourage the player to like him?
9. How will the avatar change and grow throughout the game? Physically, emo-
tionally, intellectually? Or will he remain essentially static?
10. Do the characters correspond to any of Campbell’s mythic archetypes? Or do 
they have less archetypal, more complex roles to play, and if so, what are they?
11. What sorts of sounds will each character in your game make? What sorts of 
music are appropriate for them? How will your choices of sounds and music sup-
port the way you want the player to feel about each character?
12. How do the character’s grammar, vocabulary, tone of voice, and speech patterns 
contribute to the player’s understanding of the character?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 CHAPTER 7
155
Storytelling and Narrative
Storytelling is a feature of daily experience. We do it without thinking about it 
when we recount some experience we have had, whether it is the story of how the 
golf match went with our friends, or a ﬁ ction made up for story time with our chil-
dren. We also consume stories continually—ﬁ ctional ones through novels, movies, 
plays, and television; nonﬁ ctional ones through books, documentaries, and the 
news media.
Video games often include ﬁ ctional stories that go beyond the events of the games 
themselves. Game designers add stories to enhance a game’s entertainment value, 
to keep the player interested in a long game, and to help sell the game to prospec-
tive customers.
This chapter looks at how to weave a story into a game. It focuses mostly on games 
that rely heavily on stories, though the chapter covers stories within all genres. 
We’ll examine what makes a good story and how to keep the stories from over-
whelming the gameplay of a video game. The terms interactive story and narrative
are deﬁ ned, followed by a discussion of linear and nonlinear storytelling and 
mechanisms you can use to advance the plot. Then we’ll address scripted conversa-
tions, which allow the player to participate in dialog with nonplayer characters 
(NPCs). The chapter concludes with the topic of episodic storytelling in games, 
which the Internet has helped to make possible.
Why Put Stories in Games?
Game designers, game theorists, and players have debated the subject of stories in 
games for many years, disputing issues such as whether stories belong in games at 
all and, if so, what these stories should be like and how they should work (see “The 
Great Debate” sidebar). Many players want a story along with their gameplay, and 
some game genres—role-playing games, action-adventures, and above all adventure 
games—deﬁ nitely require one. Whether a story will improve a game depends on 
the genre and how rich a story you want to tell. Although a story won’t help in all 
cases, here are four good reasons for including a story in your game:
■ Stories can add signiﬁ cantly to the entertainment that a game offers. 
Without a story, a game is a competition: exciting, but artiﬁ cial. A story gives the 
competition a context, and it facilitates the essential act of pretending that all 
games require. A story provides greater emotional satisfaction by providing a sense 
of progress toward a dramatically meaningful, rather than an abstract, goal.
CHAPTER 7


--- PAGE BREAK ---

156 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ Stories attract a wider audience. The added entertainment value of a story will, 
in turn, attract more people to a game. Many players need a story to motivate them 
to play; if the game offers only challenges and no story, they won’t buy it. Although 
adding a story makes development of the game cost more, it also makes the game 
appeal to more people. On the other hand, players who don’t need a story are free 
to ignore it—provided that the story is not intrusive.
■ Stories help keep players interested in long games. Simple, quick games such 
as Bejeweled don’t need a story and would probably feel a bit odd if one were tacked 
on; that would be like adding a story onto a game of checkers or tic-tac-toe. In a 
short game, getting a high score provides all the reward the player needs. But in a 
long game—one that lasts for many hours or even days—simply racking up points 
isn’t enough reason for most players to carry on. Furthermore, stories offer novelty. 
A long game needs variety, or it begins to feel repetitive and boring; a compelling 
story provides that variety.
■ Stories help to sell the game. It’s difﬁ cult to show gameplay via printed posters, 
magazine ads, and the box the game comes in. Gameplay, as an active process, isn’t 
always easy to explain in words or static pictures. But your publisher’s marketing 
department can depict characters and situations from your game’s story and even 
print part of the story itself in their advertising materials.
This book can’t teach you the fundamentals of good storytelling; you can choose 
from many hundreds of books and classes on creative writing for that. Instead, 
we’ll look at the ways that stories may be incorporated into video games and how 
interactive stories differ from traditional ones. Designing characters, an important 
part of any kind of storytelling, is covered in depth in Chapter 6, “Character 
Development.”
There isn’t one right way to include a story in a game; how you do it depends on 
what kind of entertainment experience you want to deliver and what kind of player 
you want to serve. 
The type of game you choose to build will determine whether it needs a story and, 
if so, how long and how rich that story should be. A simple game such as Space
Invaders requires only a one-line backstory and nothing else: “Aliens are invading 
Earth, and only you can stop them.” Indeed, such a game should not include any 
more story than that; a story only distracts the player from the frenetic gameplay. 
At the other end of the spectrum, adventure games such as Dreamfall and Discworld 
Noir offer stories as involved as any novel. These games cannot exist without their 
stories; storytelling offers up to half the entertainment in the game. 
A few games allow the storytelling to overshadow the gameplay and give the player 
little to do. This was a common mistake when the industry ﬁ rst began to make 
video games based on movie or book franchises. Critics and players uniformly con-
sidered them poor games because they violated the design rule that Gameplay 
Comes First. A designer must always keep that design rule in mind, no matter where 
the original franchise idea came from.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
157
 CHAPTER 7
THE GREAT DEBATE
Among theoreticians, interactive storytelling is the single most hotly debated issue in 
all of game design. What does interactive storytelling actually mean? Is such a thing 
possible? Should we do it? How should we do it? What are we trying to achieve by doing 
it? How can we determine if we’re doing it well? And the problem gets worse: The game 
industry doesn’t even know what to call it. Interactive storytelling, interactive narrative, 
interactive drama, interactive ﬁ ction, and storyplaying have all been proposed. In the 
1990s, the academic community began to consider the issue and drew its own battle 
lines. The narratologists (people who study narrative) conducted ﬁ erce and often impen-
etrable arguments with the ludologists (people who study games and play) in the learned 
pages of scholarly journals. Search the Internet for “interactive narrative” and you will 
be overwhelmed by a confusing tide of conﬂ icting verbiage.
These interesting and sometimes important arguments may eventually change the industry, 
but in the meantime you need to build a game. Use the principle of player-centric design, 
and don’t worry about the theoretical arguments. Build a story into your game if you 
believe it will help to entertain the player, and don’t build one in if it won’t.
The following factors affect how much of a story a game should include, and you 
should take them into account when you make your decision:
■ Length. As the previous section said, the longer a game, the more it beneﬁ ts 
from a story. A story can tie the disparate events of a longer game into a single con-
tinuous experience and keep the player’s interest.
■ Characters. If the game focuses on individual people (or at least, characters the 
player can identify with, whether human or not) then it can beneﬁ t from a story. If 
the game revolves around large numbers of fairly anonymous people—such as the 
visitors in Theme Park—then adding a story won’t be easy.
■ Degree of realism. Abstract games don’t lend themselves to storytelling; repre-
sentational ones often do. You may ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to write a compelling story 
about a purely artiﬁ cial set of relationships and problems, while a realistic game 
can often beneﬁ t from a story. This rule does not hold in all cases: Highly realistic 
vehicle simulators and sports games usually don’t include stories because the prem-
ise of the game doesn’t require one; on the other hand, Ms. Pac-Man, an abstract 
game, did tell a cute little story because the game included characters.
■ Emotional richness. Ordinary single-player gameplay seldom inspires any but a 
few emotions: pleasure in success; frustration at failure; determination, perhaps; 
and occasionally an aha! moment when the player ﬁ gures out a puzzle. Deeper 
emotions can come only when the player identiﬁ es with characters and their prob-
lems, which happens within a well-written story. If you want to inspire a greater 
variety of emotions, you need to write a story to do it.
NOTE There is no 
single “right” way to 
design an interactive 
story. Each approach 
has strengths and 
weaknesses. Choose 
the one that best 
serves the player’s 
entertainment.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

158 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
You may also want to include a story to set your game apart from games using simi-
lar gameplay mechanics. The gameplay of Half-Life is virtually identical to that of 
any other ﬁ rst-person shooter, but the story sets it apart.
Key Concepts
Before we look at the design processes required to put a story into your game, you 
need to understand a number of key concepts, because they come up again and 
again throughout the discussion.
Story
In the loosest deﬁ nition, a story is an account of a series of events, either historical 
or ﬁ ctitious. On that basis, a few people would say that every game contains a story 
because the action of the game can be described afterward. Although theoretically 
correct, this position isn’t very useful to a game designer. The description of a Tetris
game would be a supremely uninteresting story because of the game’s endless repe-
tition and its lack of emotional content, apart from the player’s own feelings. It is 
so bad a story as to be not worth telling. If you’re going to incorporate stories into 
games, they should be good stories.
REQUIREMENTS OF GOOD STORIES
For the purpose of putting good stories into games, we need to expand the original 
deﬁ nition beyond “an account of a series of events.” A minimally acceptable story, 
then, must be credible, coherent, and dramatically meaningful.
You can be the last member of the human race left alive, or you can invent a time 
machine, but not both.
—KEN PERLIN, PROFESSOR AT NEW YORK UNIVERSITY
Credible simply means that people can believe the story, although in the case of
ﬁ ction, they may have to suspend some disbelief to make belief possible. Many fan-
tasy and science ﬁ ction stories incredible in real-world terms, become perfectly 
believable once the reader accepts their premises. Even fantasy and science ﬁ ction 
stories mustn’t push it too far, as the quotation from Ken Perlin illustrates. They 
must also offer characters that the audience can sympathize with, identify with,
or recognize as convincing. If a character isn’t believable, the story is ﬂ awed. 
Humorous stories don’t have to be as credible as serious ones. Different audiences 
also tolerate varying levels of credibility, so you should test your story on several 
people to see if they ﬁ nd it believable.
Coherent means that the events in a story must not be irrelevant or arbitrary but must 
harmonize to create a pleasing whole. Even if some events are not related by cause 
and effect or some events just add color, all events still have to belong in the story. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
159
 CHAPTER 7
A story about the Apollo space program that included events from the ﬁ rst-century 
Roman invasion of Judea would be incoherent because the Roman invasion of Judea 
had no connection at all with the Apollo program. On the other hand, if the story 
of the Apollo program included a scene of Galileo building his telescope, that could 
be harmonious because Galileo’s use of the telescope to study the heavens represents 
an important milestone in astronomy that ultimately led to the moon landings.
To be dramatically meaningful, the story’s events have to involve something, or pref-
erably someone, the listener cares about. The story must be constructed in such a 
way as to encourage the listener to take an interest in, and preferably identify with, 
one or more of the story’s characters. When a game tells a story, the dramatically 
meaningful events may be explicitly planned by the writer, or they may arise natu-
rally out of the process of playing. Either way, all events must contribute to the 
player’s involvement in the story through identiﬁ cation with characters and inter-
est in what happens to those characters. See the “Dramatic Tension and Gameplay 
Tension” section later in this chapter.
INTERACTIVE STORIES
In English, stories—even those set in the future—are normally written using the 
past tense. An interactive story, on the other hand, takes place now, with the
player in the middle of the series of events, moving forward through those events. 
Furthermore, the player’s actions form part of the story itself, which makes an 
interactive story very different from a story presented to a passive audience. In
fact, an interactive story includes three kinds of events:
■ Player events are actions performed directly by the player. In addition to giving 
the player actions to perform as part of gameplay—actions intended to overcome 
challenges—you can give the player additional actions to perform as part of the 
story. Role-playing by talking to other characters, for example, might serve the 
needs of the story even if overcoming the game’s challenges does not require talk-
ing. If the player’s actions can affect the plot of the story and change its future, 
they’re called dramatic actions. Some player actions are not dramatic, however: 
Some player events aimed at overcoming challenges may not affect the plot.
■ In-game events are events initiated by the core mechanics of the game. These 
events may be responses to the player’s actions (such as a trap that snaps when the 
player steps on a particular stone) or independent of the player’s actions (such as a 
simulated guard character checking to see that the castle doors are locked). The 
player might be able to intentionally cause these events to occur, to change the way 
they occur, or to prevent them entirely—which is part of what makes the story 
interactive.
■ Narrative events are events whose content the player cannot change, although 
he may be able to change whether they occur or not. A narrative event narrates 
some action to the player; he does not interact with it. Narrative events are described
in the “Narrative” section following this one.
NOTE A good story 
must, at minimum, 
be a credible and 
coherent account of 
dramatically meaning-
ful events. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

160 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
With this in mind, consider the following formal deﬁ nition of an interactive story.
INTERACTIVE STORY An interactive story is a story that the player interacts with by 
contributing actions to it. A story may be interactive even if the player’s actions cannot 
change the direction of the plot.
This deﬁ nition of an interactive story differs from those of many other designers, 
who often assert that if the player’s actions do not change the direction of the plot 
(that is, the plot is linear) the story is not interactive. The power to change the 
direction of the plot—the story’s future events—is called agency. Some designers 
feel that if a game with a story does not offer the player agency, it can’t be said to 
be a truly interactive story. This is a misconception, because it ignores the role of 
the player’s own actions in forming his experience of the game. A player still feels 
as if he is interacting with a story even if his actions do not change future events. 
The player contributes to the sequence of events, and that is what matters.
Consider a situation in which a player must ﬁ nd a way to get past a security guard 
to enter a building. You can give the player several ways to accomplish this: 
through violence, or trickery, or patience—waiting until the security guard goes off 
shift. No matter which approach the player chooses, he still enters the building 
through the same door and encounters the same things on the other side. If his 
decision does not actually affect the future events of the story, he has no agency. 
But his decision about how to get through the door contributes to the plot; his own 
actions are part of his experience of the game. This is how a story can be linear and 
still be interactive.
We discuss the distinction between stories that cannot be changed and those that 
can be changed in the sections “Linear Stories” and “Nonlinear Stories” later in 
this chapter.
Notice that the deﬁ nition does not say anything about quality. Remember that to 
be a good story, a story’s events must be credible, coherent, and dramatically mean-
ingful. The player’s actions constitute events in the story, so the more that those 
actions are credible, coherent, and dramatically meaningful events, the better the 
story will be. (Even an action that is not a dramatic action—one that changes the 
plot, as explained earlier—can still be dramatically meaningful; that is, it can be 
about something the player cares about.) When designing an interactive story, you 
shouldn’t give the player things to do that don’t credibly belong in the story; the 
result will be incoherent. In the Grand Theft Auto series, the player can’t set up a 
charity for the homeless, and in the Police Quest series he can’t steal cars.
In most games with an interactive story, the player’s actions move the plot along. 
When the player overcomes a challenge, the game responds with the next event in 
the story. If the player doesn’t overcome a challenge, either the story comes to a 
premature end (as it would when, say, the avatar dies in the attempt) or the story 
simply fails to advance—the player doesn’t see future story events until he manages 
to get past the speciﬁ c obstacle. However, there are exceptions to this arrangement; 
in some games the story progresses whether or not the player meets the game’s 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
161
 CHAPTER 7
challenges. The section “Mechanisms for Advancing the Plot” addresses this issue 
in detail later.
Narrative
The deﬁ nition of narrative is open to debate, but this book uses a deﬁ nition that 
conforms pretty closely to that used by theorists of storytelling. Narrative consists 
of the text or the discourse produced by the act of narration. In an interactive story, 
narrative is the part of the story that you, the designer, narrate to your player—as 
opposed to those actions that the player performs, or those events that the core 
mechanics create.
NARRATIVE The term narrative refers to story events that are narrated—that is, told or 
shown—by the game to the player. Narrative consists of the noninteractive, 
presentational part of the story.
THE ROLE OF NARRATIVE
The primary function of narrative in a video game is to present events over which 
the player has no control. Typically these events consist of things that happen to 
the avatar that the player cannot prevent and events that happen when the avatar 
is not present, but we still want the player to see or to know about them. Scenes 
depicting success or failure are usually narrative events.
Narrative also lets you show the player a prolog to the game or the current level if 
you want to. It not only introduces the player to the situation in the game—the 
game’s main challenge—but also to the game world itself. When a football game 
shows the athletes running onto the ﬁ eld at the beginning of the game, that’s a 
narrative event that the player can’t change. It simply creates context. Although the 
sights and sounds of your game—the graphics and audio—create the immediate 
physical embodiment of your game’s world (how the world looks), they can’t 
explain its history and culture (why it looks that way). If you don’t design that
culture and history, the game world will feel like a theme park: all false fronts and
a thin veneer over the game’s mechanics. To establish a feeling of richness and 
depth, you must create a background, and you can reveal some of that through
narration. Narrative very often serves as a reward when the player achieves a major 
goal of the game—he gets to see a movie or read more of the story he’s playing 
through. Players who don’t like stories in games usually ignore these narrative 
moments, but many players enjoy them a great deal. 
COMMONLY USED NARRATIVE BLOCKS
Many video games use blocks of narrative material—brief episodes of noninterac-
tive content—to tell parts of the story. Designers commonly use a narrative block as 
an opening sequence, to introduce the story at the beginning of the game; as an 
ending sequence, to wrap up the story when the player completes the game; as an 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

162 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
interlevel sequence that often takes the form of a brieﬁ ng about what the player 
will encounter in the next level (or chapter or mission); or in the form of cut-scenes,
that is, short noninteractive sequences presented during play that interrupt it 
momentarily.
The game Half-Life, for example, begins with a movie in which Gordon Freeman, 
the player’s avatar, takes a tram ride through the Black Mesa research complex 
while a voice explains why he is there. This opening sequence introduces the game 
world and sets the stage for the experience to follow.
Narrative blocks presented between levels tend to last from 30 seconds to 4 or 5 
minutes. Those at the beginning and end of the game are sometimes longer still, 
because they provide important narrative bookends to the entire experience. In 
Halo 2, the introduction scene is more than 5 minutes long.
Cut-scenes during play, on the other hand, should be shorter because they inter-
rupt the ﬂ ow and rhythm of the player’s actions. Players who like fast-moving 
genres such as real-time strategy games or action-adventures are annoyed if you 
keep them listening or watching for too long without giving them something to 
do. Players of slower-moving games such as adventure games or role-playing games 
tolerate long cut-scenes better.
DESIGN RULE  Noninteractive Sequences
Must Be Interruptible
All narrative material must be interruptible by the player. Provide a button that allows 
players to skip the sequence and go on to whatever follows, even if the sequence contains 
important information that players need to know to win the game. A player who has 
played the game before already knows what the narrative contains.
FORMS OF NARRATIVE
Narrative in a video game can take many forms. A prerendered movie, a cut-scene
displayed by the graphics engine, scrolling text that introduces a mission, voice-
over commentary that explains the backstory of the game, or even a long monolog 
by a character can all be considered narrative elements of the game.
There’s one exception to the deﬁ nition of narrative. A single, prerecorded line of 
dialog spoken by a game character might be considered to be narrative because the 
player can’t change it as it is being played back. However, dialog in games usually 
occurs in an interactive context, with the player choosing a line for her character
to say, and the game choosing, based on what the player’s avatar said, an appropri-
ate line in response. Therefore, individual lines of dialog are not narrative. A long,
noninteractive dialog between NPCs, on the other hand, qualiﬁ es as narrative.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
163
 CHAPTER 7
BALANCING NARRATIVE AND GAMEPLAY
Because playing games is an active process and watching a narrative is a passive 
one, the player notices the difference between them. A simple arcade game such as 
Tempest presents no narrative—it is entirely gameplay. A novel or a movie offers no 
gameplay—it is entirely narrative. The more narrative you include, the more the 
player sits doing nothing, simply observing your story.
But players don’t play games in order to watch movies; they play in order to act. 
Any game that includes narrative elements must ﬁ nd an appropriate balance 
between the player’s desire to act and the designer’s need to narrate. If you offer too 
much narrative and too little gameplay, players will feel that your game gives bad 
value for the money they paid. Players pay for the opportunity to act out a fantasy. 
If most of your game’s content is noninteractive, they’ll feel cheated—they won’t 
get the experience that they paid for.
Too much narrative also tends to make the game feel as if it’s on rails, the player’s 
actions serving only to move the game toward a predestined conclusion. Unless 
you’ve written a game with multiple endings, the conclusion is predestined, but 
you want to make the player feel as if he actively participates in the story. When 
the designer takes over too much of the telling, the player feels as if he’s being led 
by the nose. He doesn’t have the freedom to play the game in his own way, to cre-
ate his own experience for himself.
The raison d’être of all computer gaming is interactivity: giving the player something 
to do. The trick, then, is to provide enough narrative to enrich the game world and 
motivate the player but not so much as to inhibit his freedom to meet the game’s 
challenges in whatever way he chooses. Consider this paraphrase of the words of 
the wizard Gandalf in The Lord of the Rings: “We cannot choose the times in which 
we live. All we can decide is what to do with the time that is given us.” The player 
cannot decide the world in which he plays; that is for you to determine. But he 
must have the freedom to act within that world, or there is no point in playing.
DESIGN RULE Do Not Seize Control of the Avatar
When you create your game’s narrative segments, try to avoid seizing control of the play-
er’s avatar, and above all, do not make the avatar do something that the player might not 
choose to do. In too many games, the narrative suddenly takes over and makes the avatar 
get into a ﬁ ght, walk into danger unnecessarily, or say something stupid that the player 
would never choose to say. It is fair to change the world around the avatar in response to 
the player’s actions; it is less fair to take control of the avatar away from the player.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

164 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Dramatic Tension and Gameplay Tension
Many designers are led astray by a false analogy between two superﬁ cially similar 
concepts, dramatic tension and gameplay tension. This section deﬁ nes these terms, 
discusses their role in entertaining the player, and explains why you shouldn’t
confuse them.
DRAMATIC TENSION
When a reader reads (or a viewer watches) a story, she feels dramatic tension, the 
sense that something important is at stake coupled with a desire to know what
happens next. (Screenwriters call this conﬂ ict, but game developers use conﬂ ict to 
refer to the opposition of hostile forces in a game and prefer dramatic tension,
which is more accurate in any case.) Dramatic tension is the essence of storytelling, 
whatever the medium. Cliffhangers—exciting situations at the ends of book chap-
ters or TV shows that remain unresolved until the next chapter or episode—
increase the audience’s sense of dramatic tension and ensure they stick around to 
see the situation resolve. At the climactic event of a story, the action turns, so that 
instead of the tension mounting, the tension begins to fall.
GAMEPLAY TENSION
When a player plays a game, he feels gameplay tension, also a sense that something 
important is at stake and a desire to know what happens next. But gameplay ten-
sion arises from a different source than dramatic tension does; it comes from the 
player’s desire to overcome a challenge and his uncertainty about whether he will 
succeed or fail. In multiplayer games, the player’s uncertainty about what his oppo-
nents will do next also creates gameplay tension.
THE FALSE ANALOGY
Game designers have tended to perceive an analogy between dramatic tension and 
gameplay tension, as if the two terms simply denoted the same feeling. However, 
the analogy is a false one. Dramatic tension depends on the reader’s identiﬁ cation 
with a character (or several of them) and curiosity about what will happen to that 
character. Gameplay tension does not require any characters. A darts player feels 
gameplay tension in wondering whether he can hit the bull’s-eye, but that situation 
provides dramatic tension only if the outcome matters to a character in the context 
of a story.
A key difference between dramatic tension and gameplay tension lies in the differ-
ing abilities of these feelings to persist in the face of randomness and repetition.
Randomness means unpredictable and arbitrary changes in the course of events. 
Repetition refers to identical (or extremely similar) events occurring at different 
times in the progress of the story or game.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
165
 CHAPTER 7
Dramatic tension, and reader interest in the dramatic subject, fades in the presence 
of both randomness and repetition. If the events in a story seem random—accidental
and unrelated to one another—the reader wonders why he is bothering to read it. 
Likewise, no story should include identical events that repeat themselves more than 
once or twice. If a police ofﬁ cer knocks on a potential witness’s door and there’s 
nobody home, he shouldn’t have to do it more than once or twice before he gets an 
answer. Having this happen again and again in a story would make it boring. In 
some circumstances repetition can be played for laughs, if not overdone—in The 
Secret of Monkey Island, every time the hero escapes from a hut in which he is con-
ﬁ ned, the natives put a bigger lock on the door until the door looks like a bank 
vault. But even this is not completely repetitive, because each lock the natives add 
looks different.
Gameplay tension, on the other hand, easily tolerates both randomness and repeti-
tion for much longer. Poker and Tetris include a lot of randomness and repetition, 
yet they retain their gameplay tension.
Consider the following dialog from the British television science ﬁ ction comedy 
Red Dwarf. Arnold Rimmer, sitting around one evening with his roommate, Dave 
Lister, recounts every detail of a game of Risk, die-roll by die-roll, that he played 10 
years earlier. Lister asks him repeatedly to shut up, and Rimmer can’t understand 
why.
RIMMER: But I thought that was because I hadn’t got to the really interesting bit.
LISTER: What really interesting bit?
RIMMER: Ah well, that was about two hours later, after he’d thrown a three and a two 
and I’d thrown a four and a one. I picked up the dice… 
LISTER: Hang on Rimmer, hang on… the really interesting bit is exactly the same as the 
dull bit.
RIMMER: You don’t know what I did with the dice though, do you? For all you know, I 
could have jammed them up his nostrils, head-butted him on the nose and they could have 
blasted out of his ears. That would’ve been quite interesting.
LISTER: OK, Rimmer. What did you do with the dice?
RIMMER: I threw a ﬁ ve and a two.
LISTER: And that’s the really interesting bit?
RIMMER: Well, it was interesting to me, it got me into Irkutsk.
—RED DWARF SERIES 4, EPISODE 6, “MELTDOWN”
Two lines in this exchange illustrate the point quite clearly. Lister says, “The really 
interesting bit is exactly the same as the dull bit,” and later Rimmer says, “Well, it 
was interesting to me, it got me into Irkutsk.” Like Tetris, Risk is full of repetition 
and randomness. Rimmer believes that it’s interesting because he confuses the 
gameplay tension that he felt—will I conquer Irkutsk?—with dramatic tension.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

166 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
DESIGN RULE  Randomness and Repetition
Destroy Dramatic Tension
The narrative events in a game’s story must not occur randomly or arbitrarily, nor should 
the narrative repeat itself, even if the play itself is repetitive.
The Storytelling Engine
To design a game that includes a story, you must interweave the gameplay—the 
actions taken to overcome the game’s challenges—with the narrative events of the 
story. Narrative events must be interspersed among the gameplay events in such a 
way that all events feel related to each other and part of a single sequence that 
entertains the player. If the gameplay concerns exactly the same subject matter as 
the narrative—and it should, in order to present a coherent and harmonious 
whole—then the entire experience, play and narrative together, will feel like one 
continuous story.
The storytelling engine does the weaving. Chapter 2, “Design Components and 
Processes,” introduced the storytelling engine brieﬂ y as the third major component 
of a video game along with the core mechanics and the user interface. Unlike the 
other two, the storytelling engine is optional; if the game doesn’t tell a story, it 
doesn’t have a storytelling engine.
Just as the core mechanics generate the gameplay, the storytelling engine manages 
the interweaving of narrative events into the game. The core mechanics oversee the 
player’s progress through the game’s challenges; the storytelling engine oversees 
the player’s progress through the game’s story. The storytelling engine and core 
mechanics must work together to create a single, seamless experience.
Figure 7.1 illustrates the relationship between the storytelling engine, core 
mechanics, user interface, and player. Notice that Figure 7.1 resembles Figure 2.1 
from Chapter 2. Figure 2.1 showed how the core mechanics produce and manage 
gameplay. Figure 7.1 shows how both the core mechanics and storytelling engine 
together produce the experience of interacting with a story.
As the section “Interactive Stories” explained earlier, an interactive story contains 
three types of events: player events, in-game events, and narrative events. The core 
mechanics manage the player events and in-game events, as the ﬁ gure shows. The 
storytelling engine manages the narrative events. However, the storytelling engine 
does more than just play movies or cut-scenes; it also keeps track of the progress of 
the story and determines what part of the plot should come next.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
167
 CHAPTER 7
Notice that a double-headed arrow labeled Triggers connects the storytelling engine 
to the core mechanics in Figure 7.1. At times, the core mechanics may determine 
that the interaction should stop and the storytelling engine should present some 
narrative—for instance, when a player completes a level. The core mechanics send a 
message to the storytelling engine saying that the player ﬁ nished the level and the 
storytelling engine should now display any interlevel narrative events. Likewise, 
the storytelling engine can send a trigger back to the core mechanics when a narra-
tive event ﬁ nishes (or when the player interrupts a narrative event), telling the core 
mechanics to resume play.
The storytelling engine doesn’t sit idle during play, however. As the player pro-
gresses, the mechanics continually send triggers to the storytelling engine—that
way, the storytelling engine can keep up with what’s going on. If, for example, the 
player makes a key decision that will affect the story later on, the core mechanics 
inform the storytelling engine of the decision.
Similarly, during play the storytelling engine can determine that the story has 
reached a critical plot point and trigger the core mechanics to cause changes to the 
internal economy of the game. Suppose the story says, “When the avatar reaches 
the bridge, he will be attacked by a highwayman in a cut-scene and robbed of all 
his property.” The core mechanics, tracking the player’s progress through the game 
world, send a message to the storytelling engine, “The avatar has reached the bridge.” 
The storytelling engine detects that this is a key point, halts play, and displays a 
cut-scene showing the robbery. Then it transmits a message back to the core mechan-
ics saying, “Transfer the avatar’s inventory to the highwayman and resume play.”
Normally, the level designers do the work that actually implements such events in 
the game. Among the level designer’s tools for level-building will be a mechanism 
FIGURE 7.1
The relationship 
between storytelling 
engine, core mechan-
ics, and user interface
CORE MECHANICS
STORYTELLING ENGINE
USER INTERFACE
PLAYER
Outputs
Narrative Events
In-Game Events
Triggers
Player Events
Inputs


--- PAGE BREAK ---

168 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
for detecting the avatar’s position and for triggering both the cut-scene and the 
transfer of the avatar’s property. At the moment, a development company cannot 
license a storytelling engine from a middleware company the way it can license a 
graphics engine or a physics engine, but that may change. Still, at a conceptual 
level it will help you to design the story and its interaction with the gameplay if 
you think of these events in terms of triggers sent between the two separate com-
ponents, the core mechanics and the storytelling engine.
As you can see, the storytelling engine plays a critical role in weaving the gameplay 
and narrative together to create the whole experience. The rest of this chapter refers 
to the storytelling engine frequently.
Linear Stories
From the earliest days of computer gaming, designers have been intrigued by the 
idea of agency: letting the player inﬂ uence the plot and change the outcome. 
Game developers refer to stories that the player cannot change as linear stories and 
those that the player can change as nonlinear stories. The next section addresses 
nonlinear stories.
A linear story in a video game looks similar to a linear story in any other medium, 
in that the player cannot change the plot or the ending of the story. In a game, 
however, the player still faces challenges as she goes through the story, and in fact 
the challenges form part of the story itself. Thus, a linear story in a game is still an 
interactive story, but the player’s interactions are limited to contributing actions. 
Still, many games use this format. Consider Half-Life and StarCraft: Both tell linear 
stories, the outcome of which the player cannot change, but the player performs 
many actions as part of the story along the way.
Creating linear stories offers many advantages, which explains why, after a ﬂ urry of 
experimentation with nonlinear ones in the 1990s, the game industry largely 
returned to this practice. Linear stories do have disadvantages as well, however. 
Here are some of the pros and cons to consider when designing your own story.
■ Linear stories require less content than nonlinear ones. If a player can only 
ever experience one ﬁ xed sequence of events, you only need to create material for 
those events. Developing the game using a linear story requires less time and money.
■ The storytelling engine is simpler. The storytelling engine managing a linear 
story has to keep track of only a single sequence of plot events. Because the player 
cannot change the course of events, the storytelling engine doesn’t need to record 
critical decisions that the player makes: There aren’t any. The storytelling engine 
will be easier to implement in software if you use a linear story.
■ Linear stories are less prone to bugs and absurdities. If the sequence of events 
remains the same regardless of players’ actions, you can guarantee that the story 
makes sense. On the other hand, if you allow the sequence of events to vary—that 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
169
 CHAPTER 7
is, you present a nonlinear story—you introduce the risk of error. The storytelling 
engine must guarantee that the events make sense. If the player wrecks a car during 
play in a game with a nonlinear story, the storytelling engine must ensure that the 
game does not present any subsequent gameplay or narrative material that shows 
the car undamaged. If you’re not careful, you can introduce what the ﬁ lm industry 
calls continuity errors: things that look different from the way they should look, 
given the events of preceding scenes, because narrative material can’t change to 
keep up with game events. Linear stories don’t incur this risk. If a car is wrecked as 
part of the story, it stays wrecked; if it mustn’t be wrecked, then you must not give 
the player any way to wreck it.
■ Linear stories deny the player agency. The player may have freedom to do a lot 
of things in the game, but none of it inﬂ uences the story apart from causing it to 
progress. As the previous consideration said, if the story requires a functional car 
throughout, then the gameplay cannot allow the player to wreck the car. The sec-
tion “Endings,” later in this chapter, discusses this issue in more depth.
■ Linear stories are capable of greater emotional power. From a creative stand-
point, this is one of their greatest advantages. The section “Emotional Limits of 
Nonlinear Stories” explains this point in more detail later in this chapter.
Note that if you want to tell a strictly linear story, that decision will have conse-
quences for any story you plan to treat as a journey (as many are). See the section 
“The Story as a Journey” later in this chapter.
Nonlinear Stories
If you allow the player to inﬂ uence future events and change the direction of the 
story, then the story is nonlinear. This chapter examines two of the most common 
structures for nonlinear stories—branching stories and foldback stories—in detail in 
the next two sections. A third approach, emergent narrative, is more of a research 
problem than a standard industry mechanism, and we’ll discuss it brieﬂ y. After 
that we’ll look at a new hybrid technique that shows great promise for the future of 
interactive storytelling. Finally, we’ll study an important issue for any teller of non-
linear stories: How many endings should the story have?
Branching Stories
A branching story allows the player to have a different experience each time he plays 
the game. The story offers not one plot line but many that split off from each other 
at different points. As the designer, you decide on the different possible plot lines 
and how they relate to each other. During play, the storytelling engine keeps track 
of which plot line the player is following at any given time. When the story reaches 
a branch point—a place where the current plot line subdivides—the core mechanics 
must send a trigger to the storytelling engine to tell it which of the possible 
branches of the story the player will follow next.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

170 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Game events—either player events or in-game events generated by the core 
mechanics (such as an action taken by an AI-driven NPC)—determine which 
branch the story will take. Player events that inﬂ uence the direction of the story 
fall into two categories: efforts to overcome a challenge or decisions that the story 
asks the player to make. Branch points connected with player decisions have one 
branch for each option that you offer to the player. Typically, branch points associ-
ated with challenges have only two branches leading on from the branch point, 
one for success and one for failure, though you can also create different numbers of 
branches for different degrees of success if you want to. We’ll consider the emo-
tional consequences of branches based on challenges versus those based on choices 
in the later section “Endings.”
IMMEDIATE, DEFERRED, AND CUMULATIVE INFLUENCE
If an event in the game causes the plot to branch right away, that event has an 
immediate inﬂ uence on the story. This is the most common kind of branch and the 
easiest to implement. The player makes an irrevocable decision—which road to 
take, for example—and the story promptly reﬂ ects his choice.
However, sometimes the player can make a decision early in the game that inﬂ u-
ences a branch point much later, in which case that decision has deferred inﬂ uence, 
or he can make a whole series of decisions throughout the game that cumulatively 
affect a branch point, such that his actions and decisions, taken together, have 
cumulative inﬂ uence.
If you use deferred or cumulative inﬂ uence, you must make it clear to the player 
what the possible consequences of his decisions will be. It’s unfair to give the player 
a choice early in the game without warning that this choice will have long-term 
repercussions, and then change the direction of the story hours or days later based 
on that choice. Furthermore, if he wants to change his mind, he has to reload the 
game all the way back at the point where he ﬁ rst made the choice, choose differ-
ently, and then play all the way through the game again. (That’s assuming he still 
has a save point there to reload from.) And he can only do this at all if he realizes 
how his decisions affected the current branch, which may not be obvious.
For example, if you allow a player to choose right at the beginning of a role-playing 
game whether he will play as a healer character or a ﬁ ghter character, you should 
tell him that such an important choice will have signiﬁ cant deferred consequences 
throughout the game.
Many role-playing games use cumulative inﬂ uence to build up a sort of reputation 
for the player. The game keeps track of the player’s behavior over time, and if the 
player consistently performs evil deeds, the NPCs in the game begin to treat him as 
an evil character. Again, you should warn the player that his cumulative behavior 
will have consequences later in the game.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
171
 CHAPTER 7
Trivial decisions—which color hat will I wear?—should have only trivial conse-
quences. If a trivial decision has a profound consequence, the player will feel 
cheated: He didn’t know that the decision mattered and had no reason to expect it to 
matter. Attaching important consequences to trivial decisions violates the require-
ment that stories be credible and dramatically meaningful. The Hitchhiker’s Guide to 
the Galaxy, a text adventure, did this for comedic and ironic purposes, but most 
players and critics judged it to be an unreasonably difﬁ cult game for exactly this 
reason: The player couldn’t predict what the consequences of his actions would be.
DESIGN RULE Be Clear About Consequences
Give players a reasonable amount of information about the possible consequences of their 
decisions, especially if the decision’s consequences are deferred, so that they can make 
informed choices. Don’t tie important consequences to what seem to be trivial decisions.
THE BRANCHING STORY STRUCTURE
A diagram of a branching story looks somewhat like a tree, although by convention 
the root—the beginning of the story—appears at the top, so that the tree branches 
out as it goes down the page and the story goes forward in time. Figure 7.2 shows a 
small part of the structure of a branching story.
START
END 2
END 1
FIGURE 7.2
Part of the structure
of a branching story


--- PAGE BREAK ---

172 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Each of the circles in Figure 7.2 represents a branch point, and each arrow repre-
sents a branch, that is, the player’s movement along a plot line to the next branch 
point. The storytelling engine keeps track of the player’s position in the story at 
any given moment.
As you look at Figure 7.2, be sure to note the following:
■ The branch points don’t always have the same number of branches leading away 
from them. A story can branch in any number of directions at any given point.
■ The branches go down or sideways, but they never go back up again. The dia-
gram depicts the possible progress of a story, and stories always move forward in 
time, never backward. In the course of playing a single game, the plot never follows 
the same branch or passes through the same branch point twice. This enforces the 
rule that stories must not contain identical repeating events and helps avoid the 
risk of continuity errors, as discussed earlier.
■ Unlike branches on a real tree, different branches can merge; that is, different 
plot lines can converge. Many branch points can be reached by more than one path.
■ The diagram depicts two possible endings that may be reached by different 
paths. The complete diagram would show additional endings farther down.
■ The diagram shows only one start point, but in fact a story could have several 
start points if the player made a key decision before the story actually began. The 
player might select one of several different characters to be his avatar, and that 
choice could determine where the story begins. Or the storytelling engine could 
choose from among several designated start points at random just to make the 
beginning different each time the player plays the game.
The branching story mechanism is the classic method for creating interactive stories 
that give players lots of agency. Branching plot lines let you tell a story in which 
the player’s actions strongly affect the plot, and he can see the effect of his actions 
if he plays the game more than once and makes different decisions the second 
time through.
DISADVANTAGES OF THE BRANCHING STORY
Be aware of the following three serious disadvantages of the branching story mech-
anism before you decide to use that structure for your game’s story.
■ Branching stories are extremely expensive to implement because each branch 
and each branch point require their own content. In Figure 7.2, a player can experi-
ence at most six branch points in playing from the top to the bottom of the 
ﬁ gure—not very many. That represents six player choices or challenges. After six 
choices—for example, to take the left fork of the road, to enter the building, to go 
upstairs instead of down, to talk to the old woman, to accept a letter she offers, to 
leave the room—the player has barely started the game. Yet even this simpliﬁ ed 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
173
 CHAPTER 7
example involves 21 branch points and 35 different branches, each of which requires
its own story content: gameplay and narrative material. If none of the branches 
merged again, there would be even more. This rapid growth in the number of 
branches is called the combinatorial explosion. (Combinatorics is the ﬁ eld of math-
ematics that studies the number of possible combinations of a set of things—in this 
case, a set of branch points in a branching story.)
As a result, most modern games don’t actually include much branching, and they 
often include long periods during which the player plays but doesn’t change the 
story. Wing Commander, a space combat simulator, contained a branching story,
but it branched only between missions, not during them. Eventually, the Wing 
Commander series abandoned branching storylines entirely because they proved to 
be too expensive.
■ Every critical event (those that affect the entire remainder of the plot) has to 
branch into its own unique section of the tree. Suppose a character can live or 
die at a particular branch point. If he dies, he must never be seen again, which 
means none of the plot lines from his death onward can include him. His death 
requires an entirely separate part of the tree that can never merge back into the 
rest—otherwise, he might reappear after the player knows that he’s dead. If this 
happens with two characters, the game requires four separate versions of the story: 
a version in which both live; a version in which both die; a version in which A lives 
and B dies; and a version in which B lives and A dies. Again, the number of possible 
combinations explodes.
■ The player must play the game repeatedly if he wants to see all the content. 
If the storyline branches based on how well the player meets the game’s challenges 
and he’s very successful, then the next time he plays he has to play badly on pur-
pose in order to learn the dramatic consequences of his failure! A lot of players 
would consider this to be absurd. They paid a great deal of money for the content 
in the game, and the only way to see it all is to play badly part of the time. This fac-
tor further contributed to the industry’s abandoning stories that branch frequently.
If you want to make a branching story, you will have to plan out the structure in 
the concept stage of design. You should not actually write the story at that point in 
the design process, but you won’t be able to plan a budget or schedule for your 
game unless you know how much content it will require, and a branching story’s 
resource requirements expand very rapidly.
If you ﬁ nd that these drawbacks discourage you from using a branching structure, 
you can choose the compromise that the game industry most often uses when it 
creates nonlinear stories today: the foldback story.
Foldback Stories
Foldback stories represent a compromise between branching stories and linear ones. 
In a foldback story, the plot branches a number of times but eventually folds back to 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

174 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
a single, inevitable event before branching again and folding back 
again to another inevitable event. (These are also sometimes 
called multilinear stories.) This may happen several times before 
the end of the story. See Figure 7.3 for a simpliﬁ ed example. The 
Secret of Monkey Island follows this format, as do many of the
traditional graphic adventure games.
Most foldback stories have one ending, as shown in the ﬁ gure, but 
this isn’t a requirement. You can construct a foldback story that 
branches outward to multiple endings from its last inevitable event.
Foldback stories offer players agency but in more limited amounts.
The player believes that her decisions control the course of 
events, and they do at times, but she cannot avoid certain events 
no matter what she does. She may not notice this the ﬁ rst time 
that she plays and may think that the story reﬂ ects her own 
choices at all times. If she plays the game more than once, how-
ever, she will suspect that some events are inevitable and that the 
apparent control she enjoyed on the ﬁ rst play-through was an 
illusion. This is not necessarily a bad thing and can be useful to 
you as a storyteller. There’s no reason why an interactive story 
must offer the player a way to avoid any event that she doesn’t 
want to experience. After all, stories have always included the 
occasional event that the protagonist can do nothing about. If 
Scarlett O’Hara could have prevented Atlanta from being burned 
in Gone with the Wind, the story would have had a very different 
outcome and lost much of its emotional power. It’s reasonable to 
use inevitable events to establish plot-critical situations that the 
player cannot reasonably expect to prevent or change.
The foldback story is the standard structure used by modern 
games to allow the player some agency without the cost and
complexity of a branching story. Developers routinely construct 
the interactive stories in adventure games and role-playing games 
as foldback stories. Of all forms of nonlinear interactive storytelling,
it is the easiest to devise and the most commercially successful.
If you want to create a foldback story, you should choose critical 
turning points in the plot to be the inevitable events. They need not 
always be large-scale events like the burning of Atlanta. They simply 
should be events that change things forever and from which there is 
no turning back. The hero facing his ﬁ nal challenge, for instance, 
or the death of an important character, both work well as inevitable 
FIGURE 7.3
Simpliﬁ ed structure 
of a foldback story


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
175
 CHAPTER 7
events. Obi-Wan Kenobi’s death, in Star Wars IV: A New Hope, works well as an inev-
itable event.
Emergent Narrative
Emergent narrative, a term introduced by designer Marc LeBlanc in his lecture 
“Formal Design Tools” at the 2000 Game Developers’ Conference, refers to story-
telling produced entirely by player actions and in-game events (LeBlanc, 2000). 
Emergent narrative storytelling does not contain narrative blocks (which he calls 
embedded narrative) created by a writer. The story emerges from the act of playing. 
There is no separate storytelling engine and no preplanned story structure, either 
linear or branching; in principle, anything can happen at any time so long as the 
core mechanics permit it.
Playing The Sims can create emergent narratives because the game simulates the 
activities of a group of characters and contains no prewritten narrative blocks. 
However, The Sims is not really a device for telling stories to the player because it 
gives the player so much control that he doesn’t feel as if he’s interacting with a 
story but rather that he’s creating a story. The game is more of an authoring tool. 
(See Chapter 5, “Creative and Expressive Play,” for further discussion of player sto-
rytelling as a form of creative play.)
The chief beneﬁ t of emergent narrative is that the sequence of events is not ﬁ xed 
by a linear or branching structure, so the player enjoys more agency. He can bring 
about any situation that the core mechanics will let him create. However, the 
player can control the story’s events only to the extent that he can control the core 
mechanics through his play. If the designer sets up the core mechanics in such a 
way as to force a particular situation on the player, his experience can be just as 
restricted as in a foldback story.
LeBlanc himself points out that emergent narrative is not without its problems. For 
one thing, it requires that the core mechanics be able to automatically generate 
credible, coherent, and dramatically meaningful stories—an extremely tall order. 
Core mechanics are deﬁ ned in terms of mathematical relationships rather than 
human ones; how can they produce reasonable human behavior? How can you 
make them generate emotionally satisfying stories algorithmically? At the moment, 
with the ﬁ eld in its infancy, nobody knows. Furthermore, the core mechanics must 
limit repetition and randomness, and at the moment, the core mechanics of most 
games produce a lot of both. Finally, emergent narrative seems to offer nothing for 
conventionally trained writers to do, and it might not be wise to give up on ordi-
nary writers just yet, given the millennia of storytelling experience they represent.
The best information available right now doesn’t reveal the existence of any com-
mercial games that make use of purely emergent narrative without any embedded
—that is, prewritten—material. The industry does not yet have any software that 
generates stories good enough for commercial entertainment products. At the moment, 
emergent narrative remains an experimental technique, part of an AI research ﬁ eld 
known as automated storytelling, which offers great potential for the future.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

176 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
CHARACTER-AGNOSTIC PLOTS AND KING OF DRAGON PASS
In most role-playing games (RPGs), the player gets to design her avatar from scratch at 
the beginning of the game—to choose the avatar’s race, sex, profession, and many other 
details. The game’s plot, therefore, must be character-agnostic, which is to say, the 
details of the plot do not depend on the character. Such plots have some of the same 
problems as plots created for nonspeciﬁ c avatars, which were introduced in Chapter 6, 
“Character Development.” However, there is a difference. Nonspeciﬁ c avatars have no
details the designer can work with. When a player creates an avatar, she creates those 
details, and the core mechanics and storytelling engine can work with them.
The plots of the stories in most RPGs aren’t very sophisticated, so for the most part this 
doesn’t matter much. The player completes a quest, usually by killing a lot of monsters, 
and the plot moves forward. It may branch one way if the player is choosing to role-play 
as an evil character, and another if she is good; but it’s usually a large foldback story that 
ends up in the same place regardless.
The game King of Dragon Pass, published in 1999 by A-Sharp, is an important exception 
that deserves more attention than it received. The game is set in Glorantha, the magical 
world of the RuneQuest tabletop RPG games. Superﬁ cially, King of Dragon Pass appears 
to be a sort of management simulation. The player spends much of her time managing 
food production and looking after her tribe. What sets King of Dragon Pass apart, how-
ever, is its storytelling mechanism.
The goal of the game is to become king of an entire region known as Dragon Pass, 
through a combination of economic growth, warfare, and diplomacy. The player leads 
her tribe assisted by a Council of Elders, consisting of seven NPCs. Each Elder has his or 
her own appearance, personality, and other attributes, and the player may call on any of 
them for advice when a critical situation arises that demands a decision. The advice the 
player gets naturally depends on the personal characteristics of the Elder that the player 
asks—some Elders are aggressive, some timid, some diplomatic, and so on. The player 
may also send Elders on missions of one kind and another, and the outcome of the mis-
sion may depend on which Elder the player sends. Sending a warmonger on a diplomatic 
mission can have disastrous consequences; sending a skilled negotiator on a purchasing 
mission can be highly proﬁ table.
Ordinary RPGs treat the story as a journey, and their character-agnostic plot situations 
are normally associated with a particular location. If the player avoids visiting the loca-
tion, she never experiences the situation. Also, most of the situations in ordinary RPGs 
must be resolved through combat, so no matter who the player has in her party, she has 
to ﬁ ght her way out of it one way or another.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
177
 CHAPTER 7
King of Dragon Pass is different because instead of the player going to ﬁ nd adventure, 
the adventures come to her. The player does not have an avatar who moves around, but 
events happen to her all the same. The game maintains a huge database of character-
agnostic situations, and a separate database of Elders (and potential replacement 
Elders). Situations arise either at random or in response to earlier events. When a situa-
tion occurs that requires an Elder’s attention, the player must choose which Elder will 
deal with it. The storytelling engine reads the Elder’s attributes and computes an out-
come from them. It narrates this outcome to the player and, if appropriate, triggers 
another situation that was caused by the ﬁ rst one. (The database of situations in King of 
Dragon Pass does not look like an ordinary story; rather, it is code written in a special 
programming language devised just for this purpose.)
This design has two beneﬁ ts. First, because each situation is character-agnostic, an 
Elder may die with no harm to the story. That NPC simply gets removed from the data-
base of Elders and cannot take part in any future events. There is no problem of a 
combinatorial explosion.
Second, and even more important, the outcome of a situation not only changes global 
status attributes such as the state of the tribe, it can also change the attributes of the 
Elder who was involved. The player’s choice of Elder inﬂ uences the outcome of the situa-
tion, and the situation in turn may affect the Elder’s personality: making a callow young 
man more wise, or humbling an arrogant warrior. This, then, may inﬂ uence subsequent 
situations that the Elder is involved in. Just as in presentational ﬁ ction, there is an inter-
play between characters and events that changes both.
As a result, the game can be very different every time the player plays. The Elders she 
chooses to surround herself with can produce much more varied results than we see in 
the usual RPG. The player must be a good judge of character to know which Elders to use 
for what missions. For this reason King of Dragon Pass might best be characterized as a 
leadership simulator—but so far, it is the only one known.
Endings
Readers ﬁ nd the ending of a story one of its most critical emotional moments. 
Storytellers craft their endings to evoke speciﬁ c feelings in the audience—some-
times even in the very last sentence. But an interactive story can have multiple 
endings. How many endings should your story have?
Include multiple endings if you want to give the player an outcome that reﬂ ects the 
dramatic actions he took throughout the story—those actions that actually matter 
to the story, as opposed to actions irrelevant to the drama, such as reorganizing his 
inventory or buying nicer clothing. However, the player’s desire for an outcome that 
reﬂ ects his actions varies somewhat depending on what those actions were. Players’ 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

178 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
dramatic actions in a game may be divided into those taken to surmount a challenge
and those in which the player makes a choice.
PREMATURE ENDINGS DON’T COUNT!
By ending we mean a true conclusion to the story, not a premature ending caused by the 
player failing to meet a challenge. Although dying in the middle of a long role-playing 
game does amount to losing the game, it’s not really the end of the story, simply an 
interruption in the player’s experience of that story. The player will undoubtedly restart 
the game and continue if she ﬁ nds playing the game a compelling experience. Premature 
endings should be quick because they’re only temporary, so don’t squander resources 
creating a lot of narrative material to accompany premature avatar death. Nor should you 
make the player wait a long time to get started again. Many modern games don’t even 
require the player to reload the game after a premature ending; they reload automati-
cally for her, restarting near where she left off. Other games simply don’t let the avatar 
die at all, to avoid the whole issue.
CHALLENGES AND CHOICES
Ordinary competitive games, those without stories at all, still offer more than one 
ending: The player wins or she loses, depending on how well she played. So if the 
player meets your game’s challenges well, you might want the story to end well, 
and if she meets them badly, you might let the story end badly. Just as the ﬁ nal 
score of an ordinary competitive game reﬂ ects the player’s skill in a numeric way, 
so the outcome of the story can reﬂ ect the player’s skill in a dramatic way. In gen-
eral, players expect that if they meet all the game’s challenges and make it to the 
end, the story will end in some reasonably positive way, reﬂ ecting the skill that got 
the player successfully to the end. If bad play produces a premature ending, you 
don’t have to create a full-ﬂ edged conclusion for it. When a game’s dramatic 
actions consist mostly of those taken to overcome challenges, players usually toler-
ate stories that offer only one ending.
If, on the other hand, the different possible endings reﬂ ect the player’s dramatic 
choices—critical decisions the player made in the course of the interactive story—
rather than her ability to overcome challenges, then the player will deﬁ nitely 
expect her choices to affect the outcome of the story. If the game tells her that a 
choice is important, and she ﬁ nds out that it really wasn’t, it will be distinctly dis-
appointing. You may wish to create a number of endings to show the consequences 
of the player’s dramatic choices. Games that include a lot of decision-making—
especially moral choices, which feel dramatically important—should be nonlinear 
and offer multiple endings.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
179
 CHAPTER 7
WHEN TO USE MULTIPLE ENDINGS
Devise multiple endings for your story if—and only if—each one will wrap up the 
story in a way both dramatically meaningful and emotionally consistent with the 
player’s choices and play. If you didn’t give the player a lot of dramatic freedom, 
then there’s no point in giving her different endings. On the other hand, if you 
have told the player that her actions and especially her choices are crucial to the 
ending, then you should live up to that promise and give her whatever ending her 
actions earn. You may have to create several endings, depending on how many crit-
ical choices you gave the player.
For a more detailed discussion, see the Designer’s Notebook column, “How Many 
Endings Does a Game Need?” (Adams, 2004).
Granularity
Granularity, in the context of games that tell a story, refers to the frequency with 
which the game presents elements of the narrative to the player. Consider StarCraft,
which tells a long story that runs throughout all 30 missions available in the game 
but generally presents narrative (in the form of conversations among the major 
characters of the story) only between the missions. Because the missions take any-
where from 20 minutes to over an hour to complete, the game presents narrative 
blocks rather infrequently, so we can say that the storytelling in StarCraft exhibits 
coarse granularity. The Wing Commander series of games also tells a story between 
missions and so also illustrates coarse granularity.
LucasArts’ famous adventure games—The Secret of Monkey Island and the Indiana 
Jones series—offer the player a small amount of narrative every time she solves a 
puzzle. This can happen as frequently as every four or ﬁ ve minutes, so the storytell-
ing in these games shows ﬁ ne granularity. LucasArts’ games also use shorter narrative 
blocks, generally in the form of cut-scenes or spoken exposition.
There’s no ﬁ xed standard for what constitutes coarse or ﬁ ne granularity; you will ﬁ nd 
the terms mostly useful for comparing the relative granularity of one game to another.
In theory, the storytelling in a game may have inﬁ nitesimal granularity—that is, an 
interweaving of story and gameplay with such ﬁ ne granularity that the player, 
unaware of narrative events as separate from the rest of the game, sees the game as 
one seamless interactive experience. Game developers have long attempted to 
achieve this quality for interactive storytelling with varying degrees of success. 
Generally, games come closest to reaching this goal if all story events pertain to the 
avatar and his actions (as in Half-Life, for instance) rather than if the story includes 
other events that the player must simply sit and watch.
Note that different authors use granularity to refer to a variety of different game 
design concepts: how frequently the player may take action; the degree to which 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

180 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
the game reﬂ ects the player’s achievements through point-scoring; and so on. 
Because of this ambiguity, this book uses the term only with respect to interactive 
storytelling.
Mechanisms for Advancing the Plot
In presentational media, the plot of a story advances at the rate at which the reader 
reads or the display mechanism displays. In a video game, the storytelling engine 
causes the plot to advance but not at a ﬁ xed rate and not always triggered by the 
same mechanisms each time it advances. Different games use different triggers to 
tell the storytelling engine to move forward. In some games, succeeding or failing 
at a challenge triggers plot advancement. In others, the avatar’s journey through the 
game world makes the story advance; in such games, entering a room or area may 
act as the trigger. In a very few games, the passage of time alone makes the plot 
advance, rather than anything the player does. The next three sections look at these 
mechanisms more closely. Each approach brings with it strengths and weaknesses, 
and you have to choose the one that works best for the story that you want to 
present.
The Story as a Series of Challenges or Choices
In a good many games, the plot advances only when the player meets challenges or 
makes decisions. In a war game or a vehicle simulator, completing a mission or level 
might advance the plot. StarCraft advances the plot only when the player success-
fully completes a level, whereas Wing Commander advances its plot at the end of 
every mission, but the story proceeds in different directions depending on whether 
the player succeeded or failed. In both of these coarse-grained stories, neither time 
nor progress through space affect the plot, only the fact that the level has come to 
an end.
This system works well for games that involve no travel at all or those in which 
travel itself doesn’t affect the plot. In a combat ﬂ ight simulator, the player can ﬂ y 
all over the sky, but none of that travel inﬂ uences the story. What affects the story 
is shooting down enemy planes or being shot down by them.
Suspended, a text-based puzzle game from Infocom, also uses this mechanism.
All game and story events take place in a restricted area, a small group of rooms. 
Solving puzzles in the different rooms causes the plot to advance.
Sometimes the trigger for advancing the story isn’t surmounting a challenge but 
making a choice or decision. Role-playing games often give the player important 
decisions to make, such as whether or not to join a particular guild, the conse-
quences of which signiﬁ cantly affect the story. Once the player makes a decision—
and decisions are often irreversible—the plot advances.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
181
 CHAPTER 7
If you require the player to succeed at challenges in order to advance the plot, the 
storytelling will be jerky, with sudden stops and starts. The player will sense that 
the story stalls every time he’s stymied by a challenge, then starts up again when 
he meets the challenge. That doesn’t matter much in coarse-grained stories—the 
player only expects storytelling at long intervals anyway—but in ﬁ ne-grained ones 
it feels rather mechanical.
Adventure games and role-playing games use this approach, but they combine it 
with avatar travel as a means of triggering plot advances, somewhat reducing the 
mechanistic feel of the plot advancement. They treat the story as a journey, which 
is the next topic.
The Story as a Journey
If your game involves an avatar on a journey, that is, a game in which much of the 
activity involves moving the avatar from place to place in the game world, you may 
choose to have the avatar’s movements trigger the storytelling engine to advance 
the plot. Games that use this approach almost always set up obstacles to travel so 
the avatar cannot move through the game world freely but must overcome the 
obstacles to reach new areas. In effect, then, the story as a journey consists of a 
series of challenges and sometimes choices—as we’ve discussed—but adds a travel 
element: The avatar’s arrival in an area can trigger a plot advancement all by itself, 
without any challenge or choice being involved.
Presenting a story as a journey offers the following beneﬁ ts:
■ It automatically provides novelty. Because the player continually sees new 
things as he moves through the world, the experience remains fresh and interest-
ing. The game gets the novelty that it needs to keep the player’s interest from the 
visual appearance of the world, so you don’t have to write as much novel dramatic 
material.
■ It allows the player to control the pace. Most games allow the player freedom 
to decide when to move and when to stand still. Unless the gameplay imposes a 
time limit, the player remains free to control the pace of the story—to stop and 
think about the characters and the game world and to explore without time pres-
sure. The story progresses only when the player triggers that progress by moving.
Many games use not merely a journey but speciﬁ cally the Hero’s Journey story 
structure identiﬁ ed by folklorist Joseph Campbell. Some designers ﬁ nd the Hero’s 
Journey’s mix of challenges and travel particularly well suited to single-player, ava-
tar-based game designs. For more information on the Hero’s Journey, read 
Campbell’s The Hero with a Thousand Faces (Campbell, 1972) and Christopher 
Vogler’s discussion speciﬁ cally for writers, The Writer’s Journey (Vogler, 1998).
If you treat the story as a journey and you make it a linear story, although the 
player might be able to move her avatar backward through the game world, no 
more dramatic events can occur in areas she’s already visited. For this reason, many 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

182 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
adventure games periodically require the player to pass through one-way doors—
travel mechanisms that cannot be reversed, though they may take the form of 
something other than actual doors. In The Secret of Monkey Island, the hero gets off 
a ship and onto an island by shooting himself out of a cannon. Once off the ship, 
there is no way back. The mechanism guarantees that the plot moves forward, 
along with the avatar.
Computer role-playing games routinely treat stories as journeys but use highly non-
linear stories. The party can explore a large area, generally choosing any direction 
at will (though the game includes mechanisms for keeping the party out of regions 
that it isn’t yet strong enough to tackle).
The Story as a Drama
A small number of games treat the story as a drama that progresses at its own pace, 
advancing with the passage of time itself. The story takes place in real time. In this 
case, the core mechanics don’t send triggers to the storytelling engine to advance 
the plot; rather, the storytelling engine advances the plot on its own and sends trig-
gers to the core mechanics to indicate when it’s time to offer some gameplay.
The game Night Trap operates as a drama. The story unfolds continuously, whether 
or not the player takes any action. Set at a party in a suburban house, the game 
assigns the player the goal of protecting partying teenagers from a group of invad-
ing monsters. The house is conveniently ﬁ tted with a security system consisting of 
closed-circuit cameras and various traps that, when the player sets them off, catch 
and contain any monster nearby. The player watches the different rooms on the 
security cameras and sets off the traps if a monster appears and tries to harm one of 
the teenagers who, in typical horror-movie fashion, are extraordinarily oblivious to 
it all. Night Trap requires the player to switch his view from camera to camera, follow-
ing the various events of the party and looking out for the monsters. If the player 
does nothing and a monster drags one of the kids away, the player loses points.
Night Trap consists almost entirely of storytelling; the player’s only action is to 
switch from one camera to another or to trigger a trap. Because the story progresses 
whether or not the player does anything, each game always takes the same amount 
of time to play.
The more recent, noncommercial game Façade also presents a story as a drama. In 
Façade, the player visits a couple of old friends and quickly realizes that their mar-
riage is in trouble. The player can help them work through their problems—or 
not—by engaging in dialog with them. The entire game takes place in the couple’s 
apartment, and like Night Trap, the story progresses even if the player does nothing. 
But the player’s actions during the game profoundly affect both the direction that 
the story takes and its ending.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
183
 CHAPTER 7
Emotional Limits of Interactive Stories
Video games that don’t include a story, that is, games that primarily entertain via 
the challenge and achievement of gameplay, don’t try to arouse complex emotions 
in their audiences. They limit themselves to the thrill of victory and the agony of 
defeat, or perhaps to the frustration of repeated failure. But with a story, you can 
create other kinds of feelings as well. By crafting characters that the audience cares 
about and subtle relationships among those characters, you have a chance to make 
your audience feel (in sympathy with the characters) betrayal by a lover, satisfaction 
at justice done, or a protective instinct for a child.
However, the nature of the interactive medium imposes some limits on what you 
can do. This section looks at the emotional limitations of nonlinear stories and of 
avatar-based interaction models.
Emotional Limits of Nonlinear Stories
When you tell a nonlinear story, you give the player the freedom to make choices that 
signiﬁ cantly affect the relationships among the characters, which may include 
decisions that feel emotionally wrong—or at least that don’t conform to what you, 
as a storyteller, would like the player to do. Suppose that you tell a story based on 
Shakespeare’s Hamlet, but you give the player controlling Hamlet a number of options. 
In the play, Hamlet discovers that his mother and his uncle have conspired to kill his 
father, the king of Denmark, and usurp the throne. Hamlet’s father’s ghost appears 
to him and demands that Hamlet seek revenge, but Hamlet is unsure of what to do.
In your game, the player, acting as Hamlet, could simply run away and never come 
back; he could ignore his father’s ghost and forgive his mother and uncle; he could 
try to assassinate his uncle and assume the throne himself; or he could just kill 
himself. None of these outcomes is quite as interesting as what Shakespeare actually 
wrote; in fact, some of them would bring the story to a bland and unsatisfactory 
conclusion.
By offering the player the power to change the course of the story—or at least to 
change the ending—you agree to accept the player’s decisions, even decisions that 
are not ideal in ordinary storytelling terms. You cannot guarantee that the player 
will experience the most emotionally powerful resolution you feel that your story 
offers unless you conﬁ ne the player to a single resolution (and even then, the 
player may prefer a different ending because individual taste varies).
Designers often restrict otherwise nonlinear stories to a single ending simply to 
guarantee that the players experience the emotionally meaningful outcome the 
designer planned. That means that the player’s agency before reaching the ending 
is merely an illusion. Players tolerate this in exchange for a satisfying ending, so 
long as you don’t promise them that their choices will change an ending which, in 
fact, is ﬁ xed from the start.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

184 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Emotional Limits of Avatar-Based Games
An avatar-based game is analogous to a story written in the ﬁ rst person. Reading a 
ﬁ rst-person story, the audience knows that regardless of what happens in the story, 
the narrator must have survived to write the story afterward. This isn’t absolutely 
always the case—the narrator in the novel Allan Quatermain, for instance, dies near 
the end and another character ﬁ nishes telling the story—but it does mean that 
whatever peril the narrator got into earlier in the book, you knew he would get out 
of it. As a result, ﬁ rst-person stories can’t create quite as much concern for the life 
of the narrator as third-person stories can. A ﬁ rst-person story can have a depress-
ing ending, but the narrating character cannot die prematurely.
A similar limitation applies to avatar-based games. Players know that an avatar 
should survive to the end of the game. Over the years, the avatar’s premature death 
has come to signify the player’s failure to meet a challenge rather than being an 
actual element of the story, so the death of the avatar carries almost no emotional 
impact. The player simply reloads the game and tries again.
If you really want to affect the player’s feelings with the death of a character, your 
game should kill not the avatar, but one of the avatar’s friends. Two famous exam-
ples occur in the games Planetfall and Final Fantasy VII. In Planetfall, the player’s 
sidekick, a wisecracking robot, sacriﬁ ced himself at a critical moment to allow the 
player to go on. Players often cite this as the ﬁ rst really emotionally meaningful 
moment in a computer game. In Final Fantasy VII, the villain kills Aeris 
Gainsborough, the player’s ally. Nothing the player does can prevent this, and play-
ers often mention this death, too, as a particularly emotional moment in a game.
Party-based interaction models offer you more freedom to kill off members of the 
cast than avatar-based ones because the other members of the party remain to 
carry the story along. Two different television shows serve as good examples. The 
Fugitive could not have tolerated the death of Dr. Kimble, the hero of the show—
equivalent to the avatar in an avatar-based game. On the other hand, the long-
running Law and Order series about New York detectives and prosecutors has an 
ensemble cast with no single hero. Over the many years that it has aired, the entire 
cast has changed as one character or another has come and gone. The show contin-
ues to run because its central premise doesn’t depend on any single individual.
Scripted Conversations and Dialog Trees
Natural language refers to ordinary language as spoken or written by human beings. 
Computer scientists devised the term to contrast ordinary human language with 
computer (or programming) languages. The extremely difﬁ cult problem of making 
computers understand and react appropriately to natural language—whether the 
language occurs as conversation or instruction—has puzzled artiﬁ cial intelligence 
researchers for decades. Recent research efforts have been fruitful, but the state of 
natural language comprehension is still not good enough for most video games.
TIP Many of the 
traditional rules for 
writing good stories 
in noninteractive 
media don’t apply to 
interactive media. 
A new medium requires 
new rules. Be wary 
of slavishly applying 
principles from 
other forms (such as 
Aristotle’s principles 
for drama or Robert 
McKee’s observations 
about screenwriting) 
to interactive stories. 
If it doesn’t work for 
you, throw it out!


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
185
 CHAPTER 7
Game designers would like to be able to include natural language in games without 
trying to solve a decades-old research problem. We want the player to be able to 
engage in conversations with nonplayer characters, especially in storytelling 
games. A scripted conversation allows us to approximate this. (Note that level design 
makes use of a technique often called “scripting” or “scripted events,” which is a 
different, unrelated phenomenon.)
When entering a scripted conversation, either because the player chooses to speak 
to an NPC or an NPC chooses to speak to the player, the game enters a new game-
play mode created speciﬁ cally for the purpose. All other actions normally become 
unavailable. The player doesn’t speak or type his dialog but instead chooses a pre-
written line of dialog from a menu (see Figure 7.4). When the player chooses a line 
of dialog, the game plays or prints an appropriate response from the NPC, after 
which the system gives the player a new menu of lines to choose from (some of 
which may be left over from the previous menu). This process goes back and forth 
until either the NPC refuses to speak to the player any longer or the player chooses 
to end the conversation.
In Figure 7.4, which was adapted from Neverwinter Nights 2, the player’s character, 
Joshua, is talking with a character named Zaxis. The upper window displays the 
last few exchanges from the conversation. The lower window displays Zaxis’s most 
FIGURE 7.4
The conversation menu 
in Neverwinter Nights 2


--- PAGE BREAK ---

186 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
recent remark, plus a list of lines for the player to choose from. Notice that each 
option is accompanied by a manner of speaking: diplomacy, bluff, intimidate, and 
so on. This lets the player have some idea of the tone of voice his avatar would use 
if the words were spoken aloud. Different approaches might work better with some 
NPCs than with others. 
As the NPC says phrases the player hasn’t heard before, the player may ask for elab-
oration, end the conversation, or switch the subject to a different topic. Offering the 
useful option, “Tell me again about…,” enables the player to return to an earlier point 
in the conversation and go through the NPC’s responses again if he didn’t pay close 
enough attention the ﬁ rst time. To end the conversation, the player chooses a line 
clearly intended as a farewell message (“Thanks for your help. Maybe I’ll talk to you 
again later.”), or occasionally an NPC may cut off the conversation with a line such 
as “I don’t have anything else to tell you” or “I won’t talk to you if you’re going to 
be rude.”
Structure of a Dialog Tree
Scripted conversations may be designed using a dialog tree, a branching data struc-
ture a little like the branching story tree. In a branching story tree, each branch 
point, or node, represents a place where the plot divides based on some factor—
usually a player decision. In a dialog tree, each node represents a place where a 
conversation may branch, based on the player’s decision about what he wants to 
say. Unlike a branching story, the arrows in a dialog tree can go backward as well
as forward because players sometimes want to repeat parts of their conversations. 
Each node contains a menu of exchanges, and each exchange includes one line of 
dialog available to the player and the NPC’s response to that line. From each 
exchange, an arrow points to the next node in the tree—that is, the menu of dialog 
options that the player will see next. In a scripted conversation, the computer dis-
plays all the dialog options in the current menu to the player, and waits for the 
player to choose one. When the player makes a selection, the computer plays back 
the NPC’s response, then follows the arrow to the next menu and displays the dia-
log options there. The conversation passes through menu after menu as the 
conversation progresses. 
In addition to letting the player discuss a variety of topics with a given NPC, the 
menu system allows the player to choose from a variety of different attitudes in 
which she says essentially the same thing, enabling her to project herself into the 
game as, for example, aggressive, deferential, formal, or ﬂ ippant. The NPC can then 
respond to each phrase differently, in whatever way his personality dictates. An 
easygoing character might ﬁ nd a ﬂ ippant response amusing and may choose to 
reveal more information to the player, while a powerful character who brooks no 
nonsense might be offended by wisecracks and refuse to talk to the player any 
more. (If you take this approach and the NPC’s information is vital to the plot, 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
187
 CHAPTER 7
make sure that either the powerful NPC gets over his snit after a while or there’s 
some other way for the player to obtain the information.)
Figure 7.5 (on the following page) illustrates a brief conversation in which the 
player is acting as a police detective, interviewing someone who may have wit-
nessed (or possibly committed) a crime. The conversation begins at the ﬁ rst menu, 
and in that menu the player has a choice of four approaches to the witness: polite, 
neutral, direct, or accusatory. Each approach produces a response from the witness, 
which then leads on to another menu of things for the player to say. Each menu 
has its own name.
In this example, the witness is rather uncouth, but is prepared to help the player as 
long as the player is not too hostile to him. If the player takes a strongly aggressive 
approach, the witness demands to see a lawyer, which ends the conversation. In 
this case, the player will not learn some of the information that the witness has, so 
the player will either have to re-interview the witness later, or ﬁ nd it out some 
other way.
Figure 7.5 includes several features that are particularly worth noting:
■ Not all the menus in the ﬁ gure let the player ask the same question in different 
tones. Some give the player a choice of questions to ask about different subjects. 
The menu “Ask About Evidence,” for example, lets the player ask about gunshots, a 
car, or a man in jogging clothes. If the witness doesn’t know anything about one of 
these subjects, the arrow leads back to the same menu again so the player can ask 
about a different subject.
■ Although all the witness responses in the menu “About the Car” lead to the 
same place (the “Follow-Up” menu), each one still provides the player with some 
different information. 
■ Not all questions produce unique answers. In the “Time of Bar Visit” menu, the 
polite and neutral approaches both elicit the same answer from the witness. This is 
perfectly allowable if there’s no particular reason to differentiate them.
Finally, note that in Figure 7.5, the maximum number of exchanges the player can 
have, without repetition, is eight. As with branching stories, if the menus continue 
to branch without folding back, you will soon get a combinatorial explosion of 
menus. In practice, they frequently converge, or link back to previous menus.
Unfortunately, there is no industry standard system of notation or scripting for 
designing dialog trees. Instead of creating a diagram with arrows as in Figure 7.5, you 
may ﬁ nd it easier to write your dialog in a text ﬁ le, and instead of drawing arrows, 
simply write “Go to Menu [menu name]” to indicate which menu should follow a 
given response. If such factors will affect your dialog, you should sit down with 
your programmers and devise a system of notation that will be easy for you to cre-
ate and easy for them to understand; they have to understand all the factors and 
when those factors come into play so they can write the software that actually 
implements the system.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

188 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
CONVERSATION START
NAME OF BAR
TIME OF BAR VISIT
DEMAND AN ALIBI
ASK ABOUT EVIDENCE
END
END
ABOUT THE CAR
OBSTRUCTIVE WITNESS
END
FOLLOW-UP
END
[Polite] We need your help to solve a crime. Were you on 3rd Street last night? 
Yeah, I was coming home from a bar.
[Neutral] What were you doing on 3rd Street last night? 
Getting drunk, what’s it to you?
[Direct] We think you were involved in the shooting on 3rd Street last night. 
Hey, no way! Violence is not my thing, man.
[Accusatory] Keane got shot last night. We know you did it, so start talking. 
That’s garbage, and I’m saying nothing.
[Accusatory] That’s not what your police record says. Where were you? 
Look, I was in a bar. 9 to midnight.
[Sarcastic] Oh, yeah, you’re a model citizen. You got an alibi? 
I was in a bar, OK?
[Polite] That’s good, we’ll need the name of the bar. 
I was in Foley’s from 9 until midnight.
[Neutral] Yeah? What bar were you in? 
Foley’s. I’m there every night.
[Direct] You better not be lying. What’s the name of the bar? 
I ain’t lying. It was Foley’s Bar.
[Accusatory] You weren’t in any bar, you were in the alley shooting Keane. 
No I wasn’t, and you’ve got nothing.
[Polite] Can you tell us what time you were there, please? 
Got there around 9, left around midnight.
[Neutral] When did you get there, and how long did you stay? 
Got there around 9, left around midnight.
[Direct] You better hope Foley backs you up. When were you there? 
9 to midnight. He’ll remember me all right.
[Accusatory] So tell me some lies about when you were there. 
Forget it. I want a lawyer.
All right, that’ll do for now. Don’t leave town. 
Thanks for nothing.
Did you hear any shots around that time? 
No, no shots. I’d remember shots.
We’re trying to trace a tall man in jogging clothes. Did you see him? 
Not that I remember.
When you came out, did you see a blue car go by? 
Yeah… going real fast! A sports car.
That’s all we want to know for now. 
Good, ’cause I got places to be, you know? 
Did you catch a look at the license plate? 
What, I got a photographic memory? No. 
Do you remember the model? Foreign, domestic? 
Maybe a Porsche. I’m not a car guy.
Did you see the driver? 
It was a man. That’s all I can say.
I’ve got another question about the car. 
Fire away.
I need to ask you again about your alibi. 
It’s not going to be any different.
All right, that’ll do for now. Don’t leave town. 
Thanks for nothing.
[Direct] You’re the prime suspect, unless you convince us otherwise. 
Yeah, well I was in Foley’s bar.
[Threatening] If you know who did it, you better talk or we’ll charge you. 
Fine, charge me. I want a lawyer.
FIGURE 7.5 
A small dialog tree


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
189
 CHAPTER 7
Design Issues for Dialog Trees
When you create a dialog tree, you must be sure that every possible pathway 
through the tree produces a credible conversation. If the tree is large, verifying this 
can be a tedious and time-consuming job. If any of the arrows go back to an earlier 
point in the conversation, you may ﬁ nd that you have to rewrite some dialog to 
make sure that it works both for the ﬁ rst time through the tree and also for subse-
quent times through. In the sample dialog tree, one aspect deﬁ nitely is not credible: 
the player can ask the same question in the “Ask About Evidence” menu again and 
again, and the witness will always give exactly the same response without complain-
ing. This is a weakness of scripted conversations, but it is so common that it has 
almost become a gaming convention. Players are usually willing to overlook it.
CONDITIONAL BRANCHES AND EXCHANGES
Dialog trees are seldom actually as simple as the sample dialog tree makes them 
look. Figure 7.5 shows a purely ﬁ xed conversation whose content is not inﬂ uenced 
by the core mechanics: Each player input produces exactly one response from the 
witness. But sometimes you want other factors to determine what choices the 
player has and how the NPCs respond. An NPC’s response won’t necessarily be rig-
idly connected with a player’s menu choice. Some other factor, such as the level of 
the avatar’s charisma attribute, may inﬂ uence the NPC’s reply. In order to specify 
this in the tree, you must include a way of indicating conditional branching: some 
text that reads (for example), “If the avatar’s charisma is greater than 12, give 
response A, otherwise give response B.” Likewise, role-playing games that include a 
diplomacy skill or a negotiation skill may give players with high skill levels extra 
menu items so that they can say things that unskilled characters cannot. To specify 
this in the tree, you would have to indicate the presence of conditional exchanges, 
such as “If the avatar’s diplomacy attribute is greater than 10, also include…” and 
specify an exchange that only diplomatic avatars will get to use.
Again, a diagram with arrows may or may not be the best way to document a 
scripted conversation with conditional content. Many developers use spreadsheets 
to document scripted conversations because a spreadsheet program makes it easy to 
add rows and columns as necessary while keeping the document looking tidy. If 
you have any programming experience, you may ﬁ nd it easiest to write pseudo-
code. Discuss it with the programmers, because whatever approach you choose, it
is essential that they understand it in order to produce the correct results.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

190 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
ANOTHER APPROACH
A completely different approach is to think of the conversation mechanism not as 
something that moves from one menu to another with each response (as in Figure 
7.5), but as a ﬂ exible list of options to which different exchanges may be added
or deleted at different times. In this approach, instead of creating menus of 
exchanges, you write each exchange separately, as an individual item, and give it
its own name or number. Remember that an exchange consists of a player dialog 
choice and a response from the NPC that the avatar is talking to. After each 
exchange, instead of drawing arrows leading to a new menu, you would indicate 
which new exchanges should be added to the current list, and which should be 
deleted. This way you can easily add certain exchanges that remain in the conver-
sation permanently, without having to document them in each new menu. For 
example, you can add a “That’s all I wanted to know” exchange, which ends the 
conversation, to the menu at the very beginning, and never delete it no matter 
what else is said. That would enable the player to end the conversation at any 
point. Once a subject has been raised for the ﬁ rst time, you could add a “Tell me 
again about…” exchange to the menu, and until it is deleted, the player could 
always ask to hear about that subject again.
Here’s how the ﬁ rst few lines of the conversation in the sample dialog tree would 
look using this approach. A conversation-ending dialog option, which was not in 
Figure 7.5, has been included; it is Exchange 5.
Beginning Action: Add exchanges 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 to the menu.
Exchange 1:
Player: [Polite] “We need your help to solve a crime. Were you on 3rd Street
last night?”
Response: “Yeah, I was coming home from a bar.”
Action: Delete exchanges 1, 2, 3, and 4. Add exchanges 6, 7, 8, and 9.
Exchange 2:
Player: [Neutral] “What were you doing on 3rd Street last night?”
Response: “Getting drunk, what’s it to you?”
Action: Delete exchanges 1, 2, 3, and 4. Add exchanges 6, 7, 8, and 9.
Exchange 3:
Player: [Direct] “We think you were involved in the shooting on 3rd Street
last night.”
Response: “Hey, no way! Violence is not my thing, man.”
Action: Delete exchanges 1, 2, 3, and 4. Add exchanges 10 and 11.
Exchange 4:
Player: [Accusatory] “Keane got shot last night. We know you did it, so
start talking.”
Response: “That’s garbage, and I’m saying nothing.”
Action: Delete exchanges 1, 2, 3, and 4. Add exchanges 12 and 13.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
191
 CHAPTER 7
Exchange 5:
Player: “That’s all we need. You can go.”
Response: “About time.”
Action: END.
Exchange 6:
Player: [Polite] “That’s good, we’ll need the name of the bar.”
Response: “I was in Foley’s from 9 until midnight.”
Action: Delete exchanges 6, 7, 8, and 9. Add… [exchanges from the “Ask About Evidence” 
menu].
Exchange 7:
Player: [Neutral] “Yeah? What bar were you in?”
Response: “Foley’s. I’m there every night.”
Action: Delete exchanges 6, 7, 8, and 9. Add…  [exchanges from the “Time of Bar Visit” menu].
Exchange 8:
Player: [Direct] “You better not be lying. What’s the name of the bar?”
Response: “I ain’t lying. It was Foley’s Bar.”
Action: Delete exchanges 6, 7, 8, and 9. Add… [exchanges from the “Time of Bar Visit” menu].
Exchange 9:
Player: [Accusatory] “You weren’t in any bar, you were in the alley shooting Keane.”
Response: “No I wasn’t, and you’ve got nothing.”
Action: Delete exchanges 6, 7, 8, and 9. Add exchanges 12 and 13.
Exchange 10:
Player: [Sarcastic] “Oh, yeah, you’re a model citizen. You got an alibi?”
Response: “I was in
a bar, OK?”
Action: Delete exchanges 10 and 11. Add exchanges 6, 7, 8, and 9.
Exchange 11:
Player: [Accusatory] “That’s not what your police record says. Where were you?”
Response: “Look, I was in a bar. 9 to midnight.”
Action: Delete exchanges 10 and 11. Add… [exchanges from the “Ask About Evidence “ menu].
Exchange 12:
Player: [Direct] “You’re the prime suspect, unless you convince us otherwise.”
Response: “Yeah, well I was in Foley’s bar.”
Action: Delete exchanges 12 and 13. Add… [exchanges from the “Time of Bar Visit” menu].
Exchange 13:
Player: [Threatening] “If you know who did it, you better talk or we’ll charge you.”
Response: “Fine, charge me. I want a lawyer.”
Action: END.
...


--- PAGE BREAK ---

192 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
This approach saves you a lot of duplicated effort if there are dialog options that 
you want to occur every time the game waits for input, such as the “I’m ﬁ nished 
talking” option. You simply specify when they are added to the menu, and they 
remain in the menu until they are deleted. It also lets you document conditional 
responses, or conditional exchanges, easily by including if statements in the 
Response and Action lines.
The system is also powerful, because each exchange is a separate item that you can 
add to the menu any time you want to, instead of being part of a ﬁ xed collection of 
exchanges as in Figure 7.5. However, with this power, as always, comes some risk. 
It’s much harder to read than a diagram like Figure 7.5, and it doesn’t document 
exactly what’s on the screen at any given point. In order to ﬁ nd out what options 
the player has at any point, you have to work your way through the whole conver-
sation, keeping track of which items are added and deleted as you go.
Beneﬁ ts of Scripted Conversations
Although scripted conversation forces the player to say only the lines available in 
the script, it produces a sequence of plausible remarks and replies. It also gives you 
a way to illustrate both the avatar’s and the NPC’s personality through something 
other than their appearance. You can write their lines in such a way that you give 
them distinct personalities of their own. For instance, Guybrush Threepwood, the 
hero of the Monkey Island games, uses phrases that reveal him as a wise guy who sel-
dom takes anything seriously. The character’s vocabulary, grammar, dialect, and—
if the game features recorded audio—tone of voice and accent provide important cues.
The scripted conversation is not merely a mechanism for giving the player informa-
tion, however. It’s a real part of the story, and the player’s choices can have a distinct 
effect on the progress of the game. If an NPC asks the player to entrust him with a 
valuable secret, then the player’s decision, whether to tell or not to tell, could have 
far-reaching consequences. The player has to choose responses based on her assess-
ment of the NPC’s character—to which you, the designer, must provide clues.
For a more detailed discussion of different ways of designing scripted conversa-
tions, read Chapter 14, “Dialogue Engines,” of the book Game Writing: Narrative 
Skills for Videogames, edited by Chris Bateman (Bateman, 2006). Bateman points out 
that large dialog trees can be unwieldy to work with, and he proposes some simpler 
alternatives. He is undoubtedly correct, but for complex conversations about a vari-
ety of subjects, the dialog tree offers you the most comprehensive scripting power.
When to Write the Story
A strict design rule, which ﬁ rst appeared in Chapter 3, “Game Concepts,” speciﬁ es 
that you must not write the story during the concept stage of design but only later 
during the elaboration stage. During the concept stage, your job is to deﬁ ne the 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
193
 CHAPTER 7
player’s role and the kinds of gameplay that he will experience in that role. You 
may make a list of episodes or levels that you would like to include in the game 
during the concept stage, and you can think about what the player may do in each 
level, but you must not write the whole story yet. (To reiterate, you will need to lay 
out the structure of a branching story before you try to compute the budget for the 
entire project, but you should not actually write the story itself.)
We want you to wait to write the story because, until you know what gameplay the 
game will offer, you do not know what kinds of challenges the player will face and 
what sorts of actions she will be permitted to take. Even more important, you don’t 
yet know what sorts of actions she won’t be able to take. It’s easy to write a story 
that includes too many different kinds of actions—actions that the programmers 
may not have time to implement in software. If you’ve written a story that includes 
the player’s avatar riding a horse as well as traveling on foot and only later decide 
not to implement horseback riding for technical reasons, you’ve wasted a lot of time.
The task of writing the story falls into the second major stage of game design, the 
elaboration stage. You should begin writing after you deﬁ ne the game’s primary 
gameplay mode, and preferably after you deﬁ ne all the major gameplay modes you 
will offer, because the details of those modes will tell you what sorts of actions the 
player can take and under what circumstances. In reality, writing the story will be 
an iterative process that takes place in conjunction with level design because level 
design creates the moment-by-moment sequence of experiences that the player can 
go through. If a game presents narrative only between levels, you can write a story 
with large granularity, in pieces after completing the design of each level, or even 
after all the levels are designed. But if narrative events can occur within a level, 
then you must write the story as you design the levels.
Other Considerations
This section wraps up the discussion of interactive stories by addressing the frus-
trated author syndrome and episodic and serial delivery, and includes a few thoughts
about how the industry may tell stories in the future.
The Frustrated Author Syndrome
Game designers who would really rather be authors in noninteractive media—
would-be movie directors, for example—often make a couple of key mistakes when 
writing interactive stories. First, they tend to write linear stories while pretending to 
themselves and to the players that the story offers more agency than it really does, 
promising a big role for the player and then actually giving him almost none at all. 
The game Critical Path illustrates this problem; its introduction suggests that the 
player gets to do all kinds of exciting things when in fact its story is so rigidly linear 
that the avatar dies every time the player deviates from the storyline in any way. 
(Rumors say that the developers named the game Critical Path in an effort to justify 
this weakness.)


--- PAGE BREAK ---

194 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Players see the second symptom of frustrated author syndrome as they sit through 
large quantities of narrative when they would really rather be playing. Although an 
excellent game in other respects, The Longest Journey included one scene that con-
sisted of 20 minutes of nonstop monolog by a nonplayer character. That would be a 
long soliloquy even for Shakespeare! The game’s designer, Ragnar Tørnquist, who 
originally trained as a screenwriter, admitted afterward that this was an error. Never 
forget that players come to play—to do something. Almost any sophisticated story 
requires some narrative, but you must parcel out narrative in reasonably sized blocks. 
Players won’t want to sit through much more than three or four minutes of narra-
tion at a time, and many will get frustrated long before the three-minute mark.
DESIGN RULE Be a Game Designer, Not a Filmmaker
Don’t design a game to show off your skills as a ﬁ lm director or an author. Design a game 
to entertain by giving the player things to do. Always give the player more gameplay than 
narration. The player, not the story, is the star of the show.
Episodic Delivery
Most of our discussion so far has concentrated on individual stories that come to a 
deﬁ nite end. However, a publisher will hope to exploit the popularity of a hit game 
by producing one or more sequels, a situation now so commonplace that this sec-
tion addresses designing for it intentionally. The game industry has expressed 
much interest in the business opportunities that episodic delivery might offer, sell-
ing players entertainment a few hours at a time instead of in a single large chunk, 
as games sold at retail do now.
There are three main formats for delivering multipart stories, as the following sec-
tions reveal. The television industry has more experience at delivering multipart 
stories than the game industry does, so we use familiar TV terms to help illustrate 
these three formats.
UNLIMITED SERIES
An unlimited series comprises a set of episodes, each consisting of a self-contained 
story in which the plot is both introduced and resolved. A single theme or context 
runs through the entire series but not a single plot; in fact, the stories exist so inde-
pendently of each other that you can view episodes in any order and the story still 
makes sense. American evening TV dramas used this format almost exclusively up 
through the early 1980s: In each episode of Columbo, Columbo solved exactly one 
crime. Viewers can watch each episode individually with little disadvantage. A con-
sistent world and an overarching theme tie the series together. Because each episode
offers a self-contained story, the producers can create as many episodes as they 
want (see Figure 7.6).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
195
 CHAPTER 7
The majority of games and their sequels use the unlimited series format. Each game 
in the series contains a complete story set against a consistent world. Sometimes 
the publicity materials claim that sequels carry on the story from the previous 
game, but often the connection between them is ﬂ imsy; in any case the player gets 
a thorough introduction, so even if he didn’t play the previous game, he can still 
enjoy the current one.
SERIALS
A serial consists of a (theoretically) inﬁ nite sequence of episodes. In a serial, plot 
lines extend over several episodes, developing simultaneously but at different rates 
so that only rarely does any plot begin and end within a single episode. Consequently,
the episodes are not self-contained, and if you see an isolated episode without see-
ing what went before, you won’t know what’s going on. To maintain interest, each 
episode generally ends at a critical point in a major plot strand, creating a cliff-
hanger that the writers hope will create a strong desire to see the next episode. 
Soap operas depend on this format.
Serials rely on a large cast of characters who come together in smaller groups to 
play out each of several different (and often unrelated) plot lines, of which some,
at any one time, may be beginning, coming to a climactic point, or ending. With 
no single overarching plot, events usually center on a group of people in a speciﬁ c 
location or on a small group of families. Serials lack the grand sense of resolution 
that the Hero’s Journey provides. Instead, they offer opportunities to observe differ-
ent characters interacting under a variety of stresses. The cliffhanger at the end of 
each episode may involve some shocking revelation or event that leaves us wonder-
ing how a key character will react to the news or the change in situation.
It’s a fair bet that you will see efforts to create interactive serials over the next few 
years, because the game industry would like to ﬁ nd a way to get players hooked on 
a story—and therefore paying to play it, episode after episode—in the same way 
that TV viewers seem hooked on serial dramas. Each episode of such an interactive 
serial can’t be a multihour blockbuster of the sort that the video game industry 
makes today; these games take too long to build. TV soap operas typically lower 
their production values and deliver short episodes frequently rather than long epi-
sodes infrequently, and you would expect interactive serials to work the same way. 
Figure 7.7 depicts the structure of a serial.
FIGURE 7.6
The structure of an 
unlimited series
CONSISTENT WORLD
EPISODES
Each episode deals with opening and resolving one major plot strand.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

196 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
LIMITED SERIES
A limited series includes features of both the unlimited series and the serial. The 
limited series often combines single-episode plot lines, begun and resolved within 
one episode, with other plot lines that carry over from one episode to another. 
Unlike the unlimited series or the serial, however, a limited series also maintains 
one overarching plot line that runs throughout all episodes and eventually comes 
to a deﬁ nite end, which is what makes the series limited. The TV show Babylon 5
was a limited series.
Unlike the serial, the limited series format doesn’t rely heavily on cliffhangers to 
create interest in the subsequent episodes. Instead, the overall plot line provides the 
driving interest, and the cliffhanger becomes only a secondary means of keeping 
the viewer’s interest (see Figure 7.8).
POTENTIAL AND LIMITS OF EPISODIC DELIVERY
The industry already makes games in the unlimited series format, but it may start 
making games in the limited series format as well to encourage players to buy the 
whole set. Developing games as limited series will require more money and planning 
but may prove to be worth it for a game that a publisher can be certain will be a hit. 
The Harry Potter series of games, based on the books and movies, will probably prove 
to be a limited series: When the overarching story ends, the series of games will 
end just as the author plans for the series of books to end. The speed of change of 
FIGURE 7.7
The structure of 
a serial
FIGURE 7.8
An example of a 
limited series
CONSISTENT WORLD
OVERALL STORYLINE
EPISODES
Plot strands overlap episodes.
CONSISTENT WORLD
EPISODES
Plot is continuous, Strands overlap. Episodes end on a cliffhanger.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

