STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVE 
199
 CHAPTER 7
Design Practice QUESTIONS
1. How do the actions that you make available to the player work with the story in 
your game such that the story remains credible, coherent, and dramatically 
meaningful?
2. How will you design your gameplay to be sure that the player does not experience 
so much randomness or repetition that it harms the dramatic tension of your story?
3. Will the story in your game be linear or nonlinear?
4. If your story is nonlinear, will the story branch or fold back? What kinds of 
things will cause it to branch: challenges, choices, or both? Will you allow deferred 
or cumulative inﬂ uences, or will all inﬂ uences be immediate?
5. If the story folds back, how many inevitable events will it have? What will they 
be like?
6. How many endings will your story have? How does each ending reﬂ ect the play-
er’s play and/or choices throughout the game?
7. What will be the size of your game’s granularity? How and when are narrative 
events interwoven with game events and player actions?
8. What mechanism will you use to advance the plot? Travel, events, time, or some 
combination?
9. Can the story begin at the beginning of the game, or would the game beneﬁ t 
from a prolog as well?
10. Will the game include narrative (that is, noninteractive) material? What role will 
it play—an introduction, mission brieﬁ ng, transitional material, a conclusion, or 
character deﬁ nition? Is the narrative essential for the player to understand and play 
the game?
11. What form will the narrative material take? Pages in the manual? Scrolling text 
in the program? Movies? Cut-scenes? Voiceover narration? Monologs by characters?
12. What actions might the player take that are story actions but not efforts to over-
come challenges? Conversations? Construction? Exploration?
13. Will the game include scripted conversations? Between the player and which 
characters? For what purpose?
14. Will the story be multipart? If so, how will the plot lines be handled: as an 
unlimited series, a limited series, or a serial?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

User Interfaces
The user interface (UI) creates the player’s experience, making the game visible, 
audible, and playable. It has an enormous effect on whether the player perceives 
the game as satisfying or disappointing, elegant or graceless, fun or frustrating.
In this chapter, you’ll learn the general principles of user interface design and a 
process for designing your interface, along with some ideas about how to manage 
its complexity. We’ll then look at two key concepts related to game interfaces:
interaction models and camera models. After that we’ll delve into speciﬁ cs, examining 
some of the most widely used visual and audio elements in video game UI and ana-
lyzing the functionality of various types of input devices. Because the overwhelming
majority of video games include some notion of moving characters or vehicles 
around the game world, we’ll consider a variety of navigation mechanisms as they 
are implemented in different camera models and with different input devices. The 
chapter concludes with a few observations on how to make your game 
customizable.
What Is the User Interface?
What works is better than what looks good. The looks good can change, but what
works, works.
—RAY KAISER EAMES, DESIGNER AND ARCHITECT
As you saw in Figure 2.1, the UI lies between the player and the internals of the 
game. The UI knows all about any supported input and output hardware. It trans-
lates the player’s input—the button-presses (or other actions) in the real world—
into actions in the game world according to the interaction model (see Chapter 1, 
“Games and Video Games”), passing on those actions to the core mechanics, and
it presents the internal data that the player needs in each situation in visible and 
audible forms.
This chapter refers to the outputs as the visual elements and audio elements of the 
user interface and to the inputs as the control elements. When the game gives impor-
tant information to the player about his activities, the state of the game world, or 
the state of his avatar (such as the amount of health or money he has), we say that 
it gives feedback to the player—that is, it informs him of the effects of his actions. 
The visual and audio elements of the user interface that provide this information 
are called feedback elements.
NOTE To see repre-
sentative examples 
of screen layouts suit-
able for different game 
genres, read the chap-
ters in Part Two, “The 
Genres of Games,” that 
discuss the genres.
NOTE When you 
design the core me-
chanics, you should 
avoid making choices 
that depend on the 
performance charac-
teristics of particular 
input/output (I/O) 
devices. Let the UI 
manage the hardware, 
and keep the internals 
of the game hardware-
independent. If you 
later port the game to 
another machine, you 
will only have to re-
design the UI, not the 
core mechanics.
CHAPTER 8
200


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
201
 CHAPTER 8
TERMINOLOGY ISSUES
The term button is unfortunately overloaded, because it sometimes refers to a button on 
an input device that the player can physically press and at other times it refers to a visual 
element on the screen that the player can click with the mouse. In order to disambiguate 
the two, this chapter always refers to physical buttons on an input device as controller 
buttons and those on the screen, activated by the mouse, as screen buttons. Keys refers 
to keys on a computer keyboard. The term key is interchangeable with controller button
because they both transmit the same type of data.
Menus and screen buttons appear on the screen as visual elements, but clicking them 
with the mouse sends a message to the internals of the game, which makes them control 
elements as well. Furthermore, the appearance of a screen button may change in 
response to a click, making it a mechanism for giving information as well as for exercis-
ing control. Your experience with computers should allow you to tell from context what 
these terms refer to when you encounter them in this text.
Any discussion of user interface design runs into a chicken-and-egg problem: You 
can’t learn how to design a good UI without already knowing the names of com-
mon visual elements such as power bars and gauges, and this chapter can’t introduce
the common visual elements without making references to how they’re used. So, to 
address the most critical information ﬁ rst, we’ll start with the principles of inter-
face design. If you encounter a reference to an interface element you’ve never heard 
of, see the section “Visual Elements” later in the chapter for an explanation.
Dozens, perhaps hundreds, of published books address user interface design, and 
this chapter does not try to duplicate all that material. The following sections con-
centrate speciﬁ cally on user interfaces for games, how they interact with the game’s 
mechanics, and how they create the entertainment experience for the player. To 
read more about user interfaces in general, see The Elements of User Experience by 
Jesse James Garrett (Garrett, 2003).
Player-Centric Interface Design
A game’s user interface plays a more complex role than does the UI of most other 
kinds of programs. Most computer programs are tools, so their interfaces allow the 
user to enter and create data, to control processes, and to see the results. A video 
game, on the other hand, exists to entertain and, although its user interface must 
be easy to learn and use, it doesn’t tell the player everything that’s happening 
inside the game, nor does it give the player maximum control over the game. It 
mediates between the internals and the player, creating an experience for the 
player that feels to him like gameplay and storytelling.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

202 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
The player-centric approach taught in this book applies to user interface design,
as it does to all aspects of designing a game. Therefore, the discussion is tightly 
focused on what the player needs to play the game well and how to create as 
smooth and enjoyable an experience as possible.
About Innovation
Although innovation is a good thing in almost all aspects of game design—theme, 
game worlds, storytelling, art, sound, and of course gameplay—do not innovate 
unnecessarily when designing a new interface. This is especially true of button 
assignments on controllers and keyboards. Over the years, most genres have 
evolved a practical set of feedback elements and control mechanisms suited to their 
gameplay. Learn the standard techniques by playing other games in your chosen 
genre and adopt whichever of them is appropriate for your game. Pay special atten-
tion to games that are widely admired as the best of their kind. Their UI probably 
helped them secure that reputation.  
DESIGN RULE Do Not Innovate Unnecessarily in UI Design
If a standard exists, use it—or as much of it as works with your game. If you force the 
player to learn an unfamiliar UI when a perfectly good one already exists, you will frus-
trate him and he will dislike the game no matter what other good qualities it has. 
If you do choose to offer a new user interface for a familiar problem, build a tutorial 
level and playtest it thoroughly with both novice and experienced players. If test-
ing shows that your new system is not a substantial improvement over the traditional
approach, go back to what works. Also be sure to allow the player to customize the 
interface in case he doesn’t like it. The section “Allowing for Customization” 
addresses this further near the end of this chapter.
Some General Principles
The following general principles for user interface design apply to all games regard-
less of genre:
■ Be consistent. This applies to both aesthetic and functional issues; your game 
should be stylistically as well as operationally consistent. If you offer the same 
action in several different gameplay modes, assign that action to the same controller 
button or menu item in each mode. The names for things that appear in indica-
tors, menus, and the main view should be identical in each location. Your use of 
color, capitalization, typeface, and layout should be consistent throughout related 
areas of the game.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
203
 CHAPTER 8
■ Give good feedback. When the player interacts with the game, he expects the 
game to react—at least with an acknowledgment—immediately. When the player 
presses any screen button, the game should produce an audible response even if the 
button is inactive at the time. An active button’s appearance should change either 
momentarily or permanently to acknowledge the player’s click.
■ Remember that the player is the one in control. Players want to feel in charge 
of the game—at least in regard to control of their avatars. Don’t seize control of the 
avatar and make him do something the player may not want. The player can accept 
random, uncontrollable events that you may want to create in the game world or as 
part of the behavior of nonplayer characters, but don’t make the avatar do random 
things the user didn’t ask him to do.
■ Limit the number of steps required to take an action. Set a maximum of 
three controller-button presses to initiate any special move unless you need combo 
moves for a ﬁ ghting game (see Chapter 13, “Action Games”). The casual gamer’s 
twitch ability tops out at about three presses. Similarly, don’t require the player to 
go through menu after menu to ﬁ nd a commonly used command. (See “Depth ver-
sus Breadth” later in the chapter for further discussion.)
■ Permit easy reversal of actions. If a player makes a mistake, allow him to undo 
the action unless that would affect the game balance adversely. Puzzle games that 
involve manipulating items such as cards or tiles should keep an undo/redo list and 
let the player go backward and forward through it, though you can set a limit on 
how many moves backward and forward the game permits.
■ Minimize physical stress. Video games famously cause tired thumbs, and 
unfortunately, repetitive stress injuries from overused hands can seriously debili-
tate players. Assign common and rapid actions to the most easily accessible 
controller buttons. Not only do you reduce the chance of injuring your player, but 
you allow him to play longer and to enjoy it more.
■ Don’t strain the player’s short-term memory. Don’t require the player to 
remember too many things at once; provide a way for him to look up information 
that he needs. Display information that he needs constantly in a permanent feed-
back element on the screen.
■ Group related screen-based controls and feedback mechanisms on the 
screen. That way, the player can take in the information he needs in a single glance 
rather than having to look all over the screen to gather the information to make a 
decision.
■ Provide shortcuts for experienced players. Once players become experienced 
with your game, they won’t want to go through multiple layers of menus to ﬁ nd 
the command they need. Provide shortcut keys to perform the most commonly 
used actions from the game’s menus, and include a key-reassignment feature. See 
the section “Allowing for Customization” at the end of the chapter.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

204 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
What the Player Needs to Know
Players naturally need to know what’s happening in the game world, but they also 
need to know what they should do next, and most critically, they need information 
about whether their efforts are succeeding or failing, taking them closer to victory 
or closer to defeat. In this section, you learn about the information that the game 
must present to the player to enable her to play the game. In keeping with a player-
centric view of game design, think of these items as questions the player would ask.
■ Where am I? Provide the player with a view of the game world. This visual ele-
ment is called the main view. If she can’t see the whole world at one time (as she 
usually can’t), also give her a map or a mini-map that enables her to orient herself 
with respect to parts of the world that she can’t currently see. You should also pro-
vide audio feedback from the world: ambient sounds that tell her something about 
her environment.
■ What am I actually doing right now? To tell the player what she’s doing, show 
her avatar, party, units, or whatever she’s controlling in the game world, so she can 
see it (or them) moving, ﬁ ghting, resting, and so on. If the game uses a ﬁ rst-person 
perspective, you can’t show the player’s avatar, so show her something from which 
she can infer what her avatar is doing: If her avatar climbs a ladder, the player sees 
the ladder moving downward as she goes up. Here again, give audio feedback: Riding 
a horse should produce a clop-clop sound; walking or running should produce foot-
steps at an appropriate pace. Less concrete activities, such as designating an area in 
which a building will be constructed, should also produce visible and audible 
effects: Display a glow on the ground and play a deﬁ nitive clunk or similar sound.
■ What challenges am I facing? Display the game’s challenges, puzzles, combat, 
or whatever they may be—directly in the main view of the game world. Some chal-
lenges make noise: Monsters roar and boxers grunt. To show conceptual or economic
challenges, you may need text to explain the challenge, for example, “You must 
assemble all the clues and solve the mystery by midnight.”
■ Did my action succeed or fail? Show animations and indicators that display 
the consequences of actions: The player punches the bad guy and the bad guy falls 
down; the player sells a building and the money appears in her inventory. 
Accompany these consequences with suitable audio feedback for both success and 
failure: a whack sound if the player’s punch lands and a whiff sound if the player’s 
punch misses; a ka-ching! when the money comes in.
■ Do I have what I need to play successfully? The player must know what 
resources she can control and expend. Display indicators for each: ammunition, 
money, energy, and so on.
■ Am I in danger of losing the game? Show indicators for health points, power, 
time remaining in a timed challenge, or any other resource that must not be 
allowed to reach zero. Use audio signals—alarms or vocal warnings—to alert the 
player when one of these commodities nears a critical level.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
205
 CHAPTER 8
■ Am I making progress? Show indicators for the score, the percentage of a task 
completed, or the fact that a player passed a checkpoint.
■ What should I do next? Unless your game provides only a sandbox-type game 
world in which the player can run around and do anything she likes in any order, 
players need guidance about what to do. You don’t need to hold their hands every 
step of the way, but you do need to make sure they always have an idea of what the 
next action could or should be. Adventure games sometimes maintain a list of peo-
ple for the avatar to talk to or subjects to ask NPCs about. Road races over unfamiliar
territory often include signs warning of curves ahead.
■ How did I do? Give the player emotional rewards for success and (to a lesser 
extent) disincentives for failure through text messages, animations, and sounds. 
Tell her clearly when she’s doing well or badly and when she has won or lost. When 
she completes a level, give her a debrieﬁ ng: a score screen, a summary of her activi-
ties, or some narrative.
DESIGN RULE Do Not Taunt the Player
A few designers think it’s funny to taunt or insult the player for losing. This is mean-spirited 
and violates a central principle of player-centric game design—the duty to empathize. 
The player will feel bad about losing anyway. Don’t make it worse.
What the Player Wants to Do
Just as the player needs to know things, the player wants to do things. You can 
offer him many things to do depending upon the game’s genre and the current 
state of the game, but some actions crop up so commonly as to seem almost univer-
sal. Here are some extremely common actions.
■ Move. The vast majority of video games include travel through the game world 
as a basic player action. How you implement movement depends on your chosen 
camera and interaction models. You have so many different options that a whole 
section, “Navigation Mechanisms,” addresses movement later in this chapter.
■ Look around. In most games, the player cannot see the whole game world at 
one time. In addition to moving through the world, he needs a way of adjusting his 
view of the world. In avatar-based games, he can do this through the navigation 
mechanism (see “Navigation Mechanisms”). In games using multipresent and other 
interaction models that provide aerial perspectives, give him a set of controls that 
allow him to move the virtual camera to see different parts of the world.
■ Interact physically with nonplayer characters. In games involving combat, 
this usually means attacking nonplayer characters, but interaction can also mean 
giving them items from the inventory, carrying or healing them, and many other 
kinds of interactions.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

206 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ Pick portable objects up and put them down. If your game includes portable 
objects, implement a mechanism for picking them up and putting them down. 
This can mean anything from picking up a chess piece and putting it down else-
where on the board to a full-blown inventory system in a role-playing game in 
which the player can pick up objects in the environment, add them to the inven-
tory, give them to other characters, buy them, sell them, or discard them again.
Be sure to include checks to prevent items from being put down in inappropriate 
places (such as making an illegal move in chess). Some games do not permit players 
to put objects down, in order to prevent the players from leaving critical objects 
behind.
■ Manipulate ﬁ xed objects. Many objects in the environment can be manipu-
lated in place but not picked up, such as light switches and doors. For an avatar-
based game, design a mechanism that works whenever the avatar is close enough to 
the object to press it, turn it, or whatever might be necessary. In other interaction 
models, let the player interact more directly with ﬁ xed objects by clicking them. 
You can simplify this process by giving ﬁ xed objects a limited number of states 
through which they may be rotated: a light switch is on or off; curtains are fully 
open, halfway open, or closed.
■ Construct and demolish objects. Any game that allows the player to build 
things needs suitable control mechanisms for choosing something to build or 
materials to build with, selecting a place to build, and demolishing or disassem-
bling already-built objects. It also requires feedback mechanisms to indicate where 
the player may and may not build, what materials he has available, and if appropri-
ate, what it will cost. You should also include controls for allowing him to see the 
structure in progress from a variety of angles. For further discussion of construc-
tion mechanisms, see Chapter 18, “Construction and Management Simulations.”
■ Conduct negotiations and ﬁ nancial transactions, and set numeric values.
In complex simulations, players sometimes need to deal with numbers directly, 
especially when managing quantities of intangible resources such as money. 
Conventional user interfaces for desktop applications employ many ways of obtain-
ing a number from the user—typed characters, scrolling list boxes, sliders, and so 
on. Unfortunately, most of these prosaic mechanisms harm the player’s fantasy 
unless he is playing a game set in the modern world. If you need to let the player 
manipulate raw numbers, try to ﬁ nd a way—perhaps with appropriate artwork and 
consistent typefaces—to make it ﬁ t into your game’s cultural style.
■ Give orders to units or characters. Players need to give orders to units or char-
acters in many types of games. Typically this requires a two- or three-step process: 
designating the unit to receive the order, giving the order, and optionally giving 
the object of the order, or target. Orders take the form of verbs, such as attack, hug,
open, or unload, and targets take the form of direct objects for the verbs, such as thug,
dog, crate, or truck, indicating what the unit should attack, hug, open, or unload.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
207
 CHAPTER 8
■ Conduct conversations with nonplayer characters. Video games almost 
always implement dialog with NPCs as scripted conversations conducted through a 
series of menus on the screen. See “Scripted Conversations and Dialog Trees” in 
Chapter 7, “Storytelling and Narrative.”
■ Customize a character or vehicle. If your game permits the player to customize 
his character or vehicle, you will have to provide a suitable gameplay mode or shell 
menu. The player may want to customize visible attributes of avatar characters, 
such as hair, clothing, and body type, as well as invisible ones, such as dexterity. 
Players like to specify the color of the vehicles they drive, and they need a way to 
adjust a racing car’s mechanical attributes because this directly affects its 
performance.
■ Talk to friends in networked multiplayer games. Multiplayer online games 
must give players opportunities to socialize. Build these mechanisms through chat 
systems and online bulletin boards or forums.
■ Pause the game. With the exception of arcade games, any single-player game 
must allow the player to pause the action temporarily.
■ Set game options. Outside the game world, the player may want to set the 
game’s difﬁ culty level, customize the control assignments (see “Allowing for 
Customization” later in this chapter), or adjust other features such as the behavior 
of the camera. Build shell menus to allow the player to do this.
■ Save the game. All but the shortest games must give the player a way to stop the 
game and continue from the same point when the player next starts up the game 
software. See “Saving the Game” in Chapter 9, “Gameplay.”
■ End the game. Don’t forget to include a way to quit!
The Design Process
You will recall from Chapter 2, “Design Components and Processes,” that the game 
design process takes place in three stages: concept, elaboration, and tuning. Designing 
the user interface takes place early during the elaboration stage. There’s no point in 
designing it any earlier; if you do so before the end of the concept phase, the over-
all design may change dramatically and your early UI work will be wasted.
This section outlines the steps of the UI design process. You can ﬁ nd deﬁ nitions for 
many of the components you will use for your game’s UI later in this chapter.
Deﬁ ne the Gameplay Modes First
A gameplay mode consists of a camera model, an interaction model, and the game-
play (challenges and actions) available. During the concept stage, deﬁ ne, in general 
NOTE In a commer-
cial development team, 
the lead designer and 
the user interface 
designer(s) are nor-
mally different people. 
For simplicity’s sake, 
this chapter assumes 
you will do both jobs.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

208
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
terms, what gameplay modes the game will have. At the beginning of the elabora-
tion stage, start to design the gameplay modes in detail.
Your ﬁ rst job will be to design the primary gameplay mode, the one in which the 
player spends the majority of her time. See the sections “Interaction Models” and 
“Camera Models” later in this chapter for details about each of them. Once you 
have chosen the camera model, interaction model, and gameplay for the primary 
gameplay mode, you can begin to create the details of the user interface for that 
mode.
When you have designed the primary gameplay mode, move on to the other modes 
that you think your game will need. Plan the structure of the game using a ﬂ ow-
board, as described in Chapter 2. In addition to gameplay activities, don’t forget 
story-related activities. Design modes that deliver narrative content and engage in 
dialog if your game supports these. Be sure to include a way to interrupt narrative 
and get back to gameplay, and a pause menu (if it’s a real-time game) so the player 
can answer the telephone.
Gameplay modes do not typically use completely different user interfaces but 
share a number of UI features, so it’s best to deﬁ ne all the modes before you begin 
UI work. If your game provides a small number of gameplay modes (say, ﬁ ve or 
fewer), you can start work on the user interfaces as soon as you decide what pur-
pose each mode serves and what the player will do there. However, if the game 
provides a large number of modes, then you should wait until after you have 
planned the structure of the game and you understand how the game moves from 
mode to mode.
Once you have the list of gameplay modes, start to think about what visual ele-
ments and controls each will need. Using graph paper or a diagramming tool such 
as Microsoft Visio, make a ﬂ owchart of the progression of menus, dialog boxes, and 
other user interface elements that you intend to use in each mode. Also document 
what the input devices will do in each.
Occasionally gameplay modes can share a single UI when the modes differ only
in the challenges they offer. If you want to allow the player to control the change 
from one mode to another, your user interface must offer commands to accomplish 
these mode changes.
Steps in designing a game’s user interface include, for each mode, designing a 
screen layout, selecting the visual elements that will tell the player what she needs 
to know, and deﬁ ning the inputs to make the game do what she wants to do. We’ll 
take up these topics in turn. The remainder of this discussion assumes that you’re 
working on the user interface for the most important mode—the primary gameplay 
mode—although this advice applies equally to any mode.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
209
 CHAPTER 8
BUILD A PROTOTYPE UI
Experienced designers always build and test a prototype of their user interfaces before 
designing the ﬁ nal speciﬁ cations. When you have the names and functions of your UI 
elements for a mode worked out, you can begin to build a prototype using placeholder 
artwork and sounds so that you can see how your design functions. Don’t spend a lot of 
time creating artwork or audio on the assumption that you’ll use it in the ﬁ nal product; 
you may have to throw it away if your plans change. Plenty of good tools allow interface 
prototyping, including graphics and sound, with minimal programming. You can make 
very simple prototypes in Microsoft PowerPoint using the hyperlink feature to switch 
between slides. Macromedia Flash offers more power, and if you can do a little program-
ming, other game-making tools such as Blitz Basic (www.blitzbasic.com) will let you 
construct a prototype interface.
Your prototype won’t be a playable game but will display menus and screen buttons and 
react to signals from input devices. It should respond to these as accurately as possible 
given that no actual game software supports it. If a menu item should cause a switch to a 
new gameplay mode, build that in. If a controller button should shoot a laser, build the 
prototype so that at least it makes a zap noise to acknowledge the button press.
As you work and add additional gameplay modes to the prototype, keep testing to see if 
it does what you want. Don’t try to build it all at once; build a little at a time, test, tune, 
and add some more. The ﬁ nished prototype will be invaluable to the programming and 
art teams that will build the real interface. And again, don’t innovate unless you have to. 
Borrow from the best.
Choosing a Screen Layout
Once you have a clear understanding of what the player does in the primary (or 
any) mode and you’ve chosen an interaction model and a camera model, you must 
then choose the general screen layout and the visual elements that it will include.
The main view of the game world should be the largest visual element on the 
screen, and you must decide whether it will occupy a subset of the screen—a win-
dow—or whether it will occupy the entire screen and be partially obscured by 
overlays. See “Main View,” later in the chapter, for more information about your 
options.
You will need to ﬁ nd a balance between the amount of screen space that you 
devote to the main view and the amount that you devote to feedback elements and 
on-screen controls. Fortunately this seldom presents a problem in personal com-
puter and console games, which use high-resolution screens. It remains a serious 
challenge for handheld devices and a very serious one indeed for mobile phones, 
which do not yet have standardized screen sizes and shapes.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

210 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Telling the Player What He Needs to Know
What, apart from the current view of the game world, does the player need to see 
or to know about? What critical resources does he need to be aware of at all times, 
and what’s the best way to make that information available to him? Select the
data from your core mechanics that you want to show, and choose the feedback 
elements most suited to display those kinds of data using the list in “Feedback 
Elements,” later in this chapter, as a guide. Also ask yourself what warnings the 
player may need and then decide how to give both visual and audible cues. Use
the general list from “What the Player Needs to Know” earlier in this chapter, but 
remember that the gameplay you offer might dictate a slightly different list. Your 
game may include unique attributes that have never been used before, which 
require new types of feedback elements. For example, a game about clothing design 
might include an attribute called originality, and you could display the level of origi-
nality with a set of iconic images of T-shirts, ranging from plain white (unoriginal) 
to something outrageously tie-dyed (very original).
Once you have deﬁ ned the critical information, move on to the optional informa-
tion. What additional data might the player request? A map? A different viewpoint 
of the game world? Think about what feedback elements would best help him 
obtain needed information and how to organize access to such features.
Throughout this process, keep the general principles of good user interface design 
in mind; test your design against the general principles listed in “Some General 
Principles” earlier in this chapter.
Letting the Player Do What She Wants to Do
Now you can begin devising an appropriate control mechanism to initiate every 
action the player can take that affects the game (whether within the game world or 
outside of it, such as saving the game). Refer to the list provided earlier in “What 
the Player Wants to Do” to get started.
What key actions will the player take to overcome challenges? Refer to the genre 
chapters in this book for special UI concerns for each genre. What actions unre-
lated to challenges might she need: move the camera, participate in the story, 
express herself, or talk to other players online? Create visual and audible feedback 
for the actions to let the player know if these succeeded or failed.
You’ll need to map the input devices to the player’s actions, based on the interac-
tion model you have chosen (see “Interaction Models” later in this chapter). Games 
vary too much to tell you exactly how to achieve a good mapping; study other 
games in the same genre to see how they use on-screen buttons and menus or the 
physical buttons, joysticks, and other gadgets on control devices. Use the latter for 
player actions for which you want to give the player the feeling that she’s acting 
directly in the game without mediation by menus. Whenever possible, borrow 
tried-and-true techniques to keep it all as familiar as possible.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
211
 CHAPTER 8
Work on one gameplay mode at a time, and every time you move to a new game-
play mode, be sure to note the actions it has in common with other modes and 
keep the control mechanisms consistent.
Shell Menus
Shell menus allow the player to start, conﬁ gure, and otherwise manage the opera-
tion of the game before and after play. The screens and menus of the shell interface 
should allow the player to conﬁ gure the video and audio settings and the game 
controls (see “Allowing for Customization” later in the chapter), to join in multi-
player games over a network, to save and load games, and to shut down the game 
software.
The player should not have to spend much time in the shell menus. Provide a way 
to let players get right into the action with one or two clicks of a button.
A surprising number of games include awkward and ugly shell menus because 
designers assumed that creating these screens could wait until the last minute. 
Remember, the shell interface is the ﬁ rst thing your player will see when he starts 
up the game. You don’t want to make a bad impression before the player even gets 
into the game world.
Managing Complexity
As game machines become more powerful, games themselves become increasingly 
complex with correspondingly complex user interfaces. Without a scheme for man-
aging this complexity, you can end up with a game that players ﬁ nd extremely 
difﬁ cult to play—either because no one can remember all the options (as with 
some ﬂ ight simulators) or because so many icons and controls crammed onto the 
screen (as in some badly designed strategy games) leave little room for the main 
view of the game world. Here you learn some options for managing your game’s 
complexity.
Simplify the Game
This option should be your ﬁ rst resort. If your game is too complex, make it sim-
pler. You may do this in two ways: with abstraction and automation.
ABSTRACTION
When you abstract some aspect of a complicated system, you remove a more accu-
rate and detailed version of that aspect or function and replace it with a less 
accurate and detailed version or no version at all. This makes the game less realistic 
but easier to play. If the abstracted feature required UI control or feedback mecha-
nisms, you may save yourself the trouble of designing them.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

212 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Many driving games don’t simulate fuel consumption; the developers abstracted 
this idea out of the game. They don’t pretend that the car runs by magic—the player 
can still hear the engine—but they just don’t address the question. Consequently, 
the user interface needs no fuel gauge and no way to put fuel in the car. The player 
doesn’t have to think about these things, which makes the game easier to play.
AUTOMATION
When you automate a process, you remove it from the player’s control and let the 
computer handle it for her. When the game requires a choice of action, the com-
puter chooses. Note that this isn’t the same as abstraction because the underlying 
process remains part of the core mechanics; you just don’t bother the player about 
it. The computer can take over the process entirely, in which case, again, you can 
save the time you would have spent on designing UI, or you can build the manual 
controls into the game but keep them hidden unless the player chooses to take over 
manual control (usually through an option in a shell menu). Racing games often 
automate the process of shifting gears so it just happens by itself; the player doesn’t 
have to think about it.
If you let the player choose between automated or manual control over a game fea-
ture, you can refer to the two options as beginner’s mode and expert mode in the 
menu where she makes the choice. You might want to reward the player for choos-
ing the more complex task. For example, you can make automated gear-shifting 
slightly less efﬁ cient than expert manual gear-shifting, so the player who gets really 
good at manual shifting gets a beneﬁ t. If the automated task is perfectly efﬁ cient, 
the player has no incentive to learn the manual task.
Depth Versus Breadth
The more options you offer the player at one time, the more you risk scaring off a 
player who ﬁ nds complex user interfaces intimidating. A UI that provides a large 
number of options simultaneously is said to be a broad interface. If you offer only a 
few options at a time and require the player to make several selections in a row to 
get to the one he wants, the user interface is said to be deep.
Broad interfaces permit the player to search the whole interface by looking for what 
he wants, but ﬁ nding the one item of current interest in that broad array takes 
time. Once the player learns where to ﬁ nd the buttons or dials, he can usually ﬁ nd 
them again quickly. Players who invest the (sometimes considerable) training time 
ﬁ nd using a broad interface to be efﬁ cient; they can quickly issue the commands 
they want. The cockpit of a commercial passenger aircraft qualiﬁ es as an enor-
mously broad interface; with such a huge array of instruments, the pilot can place 
his hand on any button he needs almost instantly, which makes ﬂ ying safer. On 
the other hand, pilots must train for years to learn them all.
Deep interfaces normally offer all their choices through a hierarchical series of 
menus or dialog boxes. The user can quickly see what each menu offers. He can’t 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
213
 CHAPTER 8
know in advance what sequence of menu choices he must make to ﬁ nd the option 
he wants, so the menus must be named and organized coherently to guide him. 
Even once he learns to ﬁ nd a particular option, he still has to go through the 
sequence of menus to get to it each time. On the other hand, using a well-designed 
deep interface takes almost no training.
It’s a good idea to offer both a deep and a broad interface at the same time: deep
for the new players, broad for the experienced ones. You can do this on the PC by 
assigning shortcut keys to frequently used functions. The large number of keys on
a PC keyboard enables you to construct a broad interface easily. Console machines, 
with fewer controller buttons available and no mouse for pointing to screen ele-
ments, offer fewer options for creating broad interfaces.
If you can only offer one interface, try to make the breadth and depth of your inter-
face roughly equal; but avoid making anything more than three or four levels deep 
if you can help it. When deciding how to structure menus, categorize the options 
by frequency of access. The most frequently accessed elements should be one or 
two steps away from the player at most. The least frequently accessed elements can 
be farther down the hierarchy.
Context-Sensitive Interfaces
A context-sensitive interface reduces complexity by showing the player only the 
options that she may actually use at the moment. Menu options that make no 
sense in the current context simply do not display. Microsoft Windows takes a mid-
dle path, continuing to show unavailable menu options in gray, while active menu 
items display in black. This reduces the user’s confusion somewhat because she 
doesn’t wonder why an option that she saw a few minutes ago has disappeared.
Graphic adventures, role-playing games, and other mouse-controlled games often 
use a context-sensitive pointer. The pointer changes form when pointed at an 
object with which it can interact. When pointing to a tree, for instance, it may 
change to the shape of an axe to indicate that pressing the mouse button will
cause the tree to be cut down. The player learns the various things the mouse can 
do by pointing it at different objects in the game world and seeing how it changes.
Avoiding Obscurity
A user interface can function correctly and be pretty to look at, but when the player 
can’t actually tell what the buttons and menus do, it is obscure. Several factors in 
the UI design process tend to produce obscurity, and you should be on the lookout 
for them:
■ Artistic overenthusiasm. Artists naturally want to make a user interface as 
pleasing and harmonious as they can. Unfortunately, they sometimes produce UI 
elements that, while attractive, convey no meaning.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

214 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ The pressure to reduce UI screen usage. Using an icon instead of a text label 
on a screen button saves space, and so does using a small icon instead of a large 
one. But icons can’t convey complicated messages as well as text can, and small, 
simple icons are necessarily less visually distinctive than large, complex ones. 
When you reduce the amount of space required by your UI, be sure you don’t do so 
to the point of making its functions obscure.
■ Developer familiarity with the material. You know what your icons mean and 
how they work—you created them. That means you’re not the best judge of how 
clear they will be to others. Always test your UI on someone unfamiliar with your 
game. See whether your test subjects can ﬁ gure out for themselves how things 
work. If it requires a lot of experimentation, your UI is too obscure.
Interaction Models
Chapter 2 deﬁ ned the interaction model as the relationship between the player’s 
inputs via the input devices and the resulting actions in the game world. You create 
the game’s interaction model by deciding how the player’s controller-button presses 
and other real-world actions will be interpreted as game world activities by the core 
mechanics. The functional capabilities of the various input devices available will 
inﬂ uence your decisions (see “Input Devices” later in the chapter). There isn’t room 
here to discuss button assignments in detail, so you should play other games in 
your genre to ﬁ nd examples that work well.
In practice, interaction models fall into several well-known types:
■ Avatar-based, in which the player’s actions consist mostly of controlling a single 
character—his avatar—in the game world. The player acts upon the world through 
the avatar and, more importantly, generally can inﬂ uence only the region of the 
game world that the avatar currently inhabits. An avatar is analogous to the human 
body: To do something in our world, we have to physically take our bodies to the 
place where we want to do it. That doesn’t mean an avatar must be human or even 
humanoid; a vehicle can be an avatar. To implement this mode, therefore, many of 
your button-assignment decisions will center on navigation (see “Navigation 
Mechanisms” later in the chapter).
■ Multipresent (or omnipresent), in which the player can act upon several different 
parts of the game world at a time. In order for him to do so, you must give him a 
camera model that permits him to see the various areas that he can change; typi-
cally, an aerial perspective. Chess uses a multipresent interaction model; the player 
may ordinarily move any of his pieces (which can legally move) on any turn. 
Implementing this mode requires providing ways for the player to select and pick 
up objects or give orders to units.
■ In the party-based interaction model, most commonly found in role-playing 
games, small groups of characters generally remain together. In this model, you 
will probably want to use point-and-click navigation and an aerial perspective.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
215
 CHAPTER 8
■ In the contestant model, the player answers questions and makes decisions, as if a 
contestant in a TV game show. Navigation will not be necessary; you will simply 
assign different decision options to different buttons.
■ The desktop model mimics a computer (or a real) desktop and is ordinarily found 
only in games that represent some kind of ofﬁ ce activity, such as business simulations.
A coherent design that follows common industry practice will probably ﬁ t into one 
of these familiar models. You can create others if your game really requires them, 
but if you do so, you may need to design more detailed tutorial levels to teach your 
player the controls.
Camera Models
Old video games, especially those for personal computers, used to treat the game 
screen as if it were a game board in a tabletop game. Today we use a cinematic anal-
ogy and talk about the main view on the screen as if it displayed the output of a 
movie camera looking at the game world. This is the source of the terms virtual 
camera and camera model.
To deﬁ ne the camera model, you will make a number of design decisions about 
how you want the player to view the game world, what the camera focuses on, and 
how the camera behaves. Certain camera models work best with particular interac-
tion models; the next few sections introduce the most common camera models and 
discuss the appropriate interaction models for them.
FILMMAKING TERMINOLOGY
The game industry has adopted a number of terms from ﬁ lmmaking to describe certain 
kinds of camera movements. When a camera moves forward or back through the envi-
ronment, it is said to dolly, as in the camera dollies to follow the avatar. When it moves 
laterally, as it would to keep the avatar in view in a side-scrolling game, it trucks. When 
it moves vertically, it cranes. When a camera swivels about its vertical axis but does not 
move, it pans. When it swivels to look up or down, it tilts. When it rotates around an 
imaginary axis running lengthwise through the lens, it is said to roll. Games almost 
never roll their cameras except in ﬂ ight simulators; as in movies, the player normally 
expects the horizon to be level.
The 3D Versus 2D Question
A question you must decide early on is whether your game should use a 3D graph-
ics display engine or stick to 2D graphics technology. If a game uses 2D graphics, 
the ﬁ rst-person and third-person perspectives will not be available; those camera 
models require a 3D engine.
NOTE The previous 
edition of this book 
used the term perspec-
tive for all sorts of 
virtual camera behavior. 
However, perspective 
suggests a ﬁ xed point 
of view, which is no 
longer appropriate for 
today’s intelligent
virtual cameras. This 
edition still uses
perspective to refer to 
certain camera models 
that are ﬁ xed with 
respect to the game 
world or the avatar, 
such as the top-down 
perspective or the ﬁ rst-
person perspective. 
Just remember that 
a perspective is one 
kind of camera model. 
Other kinds of camera 
models, such as
context-sensitive
cameras, aren’t called 
perspectives because 
the camera’s viewpoint 
moves around.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

216 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Virtually all large standalone games running on powerful game hardware such as
a personal computer or home game console employ 3D. (Small games and those 
played within a web browser often still use 2D graphics.) With modern hardware 
now standard, you should use 3D graphics provided that you have the tools, the 
skills, and the time to do it well. If you do not have the more complex tools and the 
specialized skills to get good results, you should not try it. Good-looking 2D graph-
ics are always preferable to bad-looking 3D graphics. While it may take the player a 
while to detect weak AI or bad writing in a game, bad graphics show up from the 
ﬁ rst moment.
This question becomes critical for games on low-end mobile phones and personal 
digital assistants. With no 3D graphics acceleration hardware, if these devices dis-
play 3D graphics, they must do it with software rendering—a complex task that 
burdens the slow processors that run these gadgets. Think twice before committing 
yourself (and your programming team) to providing 3D graphics on such platforms. 
Here, above all, heed the warning that if you cannot do it well, don’t do it at all.
First-Person Perspective
In the ﬁ rst-person perspective, used only in avatar-based gameplay modes, the camera 
takes the position of the avatar’s own eyes, and is ﬁ xed with respect to the avatar. 
Therefore, the player doesn’t usually see the avatar’s body, though the game may 
display handheld weapons, if any, and occasionally the avatar’s hands. The ﬁ rst-
person perspective also works well to display the point of view of the driver of a 
vehicle; it shows the terrain ahead as well as the vehicle’s instrument panel but not 
the driver herself. It conveys an impression of speed and helps immerse the player 
in the game world. First-person perspective also removes any need for the player to 
adjust the camera and, therefore, any need for you to design UI for camera adjust-
ment. To look around, the player simply moves the avatar.
ADVANTAGES OF THE FIRST-PERSON PERSPECTIVE
Note the following beneﬁ ts of the ﬁ rst-person perspective compared with the third-
person perspective:
■ Your game doesn’t display the avatar routinely, so the artists don’t have to 
develop a large number of animations, or possibly any image at all, of the avatar. 
This can cut development costs signiﬁ cantly because you need animations only for 
those rare situations in which the player can see the avatar: cut-scenes, or if the 
avatar steps in front of a mirror.
■ You won’t need to design AI to control the camera. The camera looks exactly 
where the player tells it to look.
■ The players ﬁ nd it easier to aim ranged weapons at approaching enemies in the 
ﬁ rst-person perspective for two reasons. First, the avatar’s body does not block the 
player’s view; second, the player’s viewpoint corresponds exactly with the avatar’s, 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
217
 CHAPTER 8
and therefore, the player does not have to correct for differences between his own 
perspective and the avatar’s.
■ The players may ﬁ nd interacting with the environment easier. Many games 
require the player to maneuver the avatar precisely before allowing him to climb 
stairs, pick up objects, go through doorways, and so forth. The ﬁ rst-person perspec-
tive makes it easy for the player to position the avatar accurately with respect to 
objects.
DISADVANTAGES OF THE FIRST-PERSON PERSPECTIVE
Some of the disadvantages of the ﬁ rst-person perspective (as compared with third-
person) include these:
■ Because the player cannot see the avatar, the player doesn’t have the pleasure of 
watching her or customizing her clothing or gear, both of which form a large part 
of the entertainment in many games. Players enjoy discovering a new animation as 
the avatar performs an action for the ﬁ rst time.
■ Being unable to see the avatar’s body language and facial expressions (puzzle-
ment, fear, caution, aggression, and so on) reduces the player’s sense of her as a 
distinct character with a personality and a current mood. The avatar’s personality 
must be expressed in other ways, through scripted interactions with other charac-
ters, hints to the player, or talking to herself.
■ The ﬁ rst-person perspective denies the designer the opportunity to use cinematic 
camera angles for dramatic effect. Camera angles create visual interest for the player, 
and some games rely on them heavily: Resident Evil, for example, and Grim Fandango.
■ The ﬁ rst-person perspective makes certain types of gymnastic moves more difﬁ -
cult. A player trying to jump across a chasm by running up to its edge and pressing 
the jump button at the last instant ﬁ nds it much easier to judge the timing if the 
avatar is visible on screen. In the ﬁ rst person, the edge of the chasm disappears off 
the bottom of the screen during the approach, making it difﬁ cult to know exactly 
when the player should press the button.
■ Rapid movements, especially turning or rhythmic rising and falling motions, 
can create motion sickness in viewers. A few games tried to simulate the motion
of walking by swaying the camera as the avatar moves; this also tends to induce 
motion sickness.
Third-Person Perspective
Games with avatar-based interaction models can also use the third-person perspective.
The most common camera model in modern 3D action and action-adventure 
games with strongly characterized avatars, it has the great advantage of letting the 
player see the avatar, and the disadvantage that it requires much more work to 
implement. The camera normally follows the avatar at a ﬁ xed distance, remaining 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

218 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
behind and slightly above her as she runs around in the world so the player can see 
some way beyond the avatar into the distance.
The standard third-person perspective depends on an assumption that threats to 
the avatar will come from in front of her. Some games now include ﬁ ghting in the 
style of martial-arts movies, in which enemies can surround the avatar; consider 
recent games in the Prince of Persia series. To permit the player to see both the ava-
tar and the enemies, the camera must crane up and tilt down to show the ﬁ ght 
from a raised perspective.
Designing the camera behavior for the third-person perspective poses a number of 
challenges, discussed in the next few sections.
CAMERA BEHAVIOR WHEN THE AVATAR TURNS
So long as the avatar moves forward, away from the camera, the camera dollies to 
follow; you should ﬁ nd this behavior easy to implement. When the avatar turns, 
however, you have several options:
■ The camera keeps itself continuously oriented behind the avatar, as in the chase
view in ﬂ ight simulators (see Chapter 17, “Vehicle Simulations”). The camera 
always points in the direction in which the avatar looks, allowing the player to 
always see where the avatar is going, which is useful in high-speed or high-threat 
environments. Unfortunately, the player never sees the avatar’s side or front, only 
her back, which takes some of the fun out of watching the avatar. Also, a human 
avatar can change directions rapidly (unlike a vehicle), and the camera must sweep 
around quickly in order to remain behind her, which can give the player motion 
sickness.
■ The camera reorients itself behind the avatar somewhat more slowly, beginning 
a few seconds after the avatar makes her turn. This option enables the player to see 
the avatar’s side for a few seconds until the camera reorients itself. Fewer players 
will ﬁ nd the images dizzying. Super Mario 64, one of the ﬁ rst, and best, 3D console 
games adopted this approach.
■ The camera reorients itself behind the avatar only after she stops moving. 
Although this is the least-intrusive way to reorient the camera, it does mean that if 
the player instructs the moving avatar to turn and run back the way she came, she 
runs directly toward the camera, which does not reorient itself; instead it simply 
dollies away from her to keep her in view. The player cannot see any obstacles or 
enemies in the avatar’s way because they appear to be behind the camera (until the 
instant before she runs into them). Toy Story 2: Buzz Lightyear to the Rescue uses this 
option; the effect, while somewhat peculiar, works well in the game’s largely non-
threatening environment.
If you plan for the camera to automatically reorient itself, you can give the player 
control over how quickly the reorientation occurs by switching between active cam-
era mode and passive camera mode. In active mode, the camera either remains 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
219
 CHAPTER 8
oriented behind the avatar at all times or reorients itself quickly; in passive mode,
it either orients itself slowly or only when the avatar stops moving. 
INTRUDING LANDSCAPE OBJECTS
What happens when the player maneuvers the avatar to stand with her back to a 
wall? The camera cannot retain its normal distance from the avatar; if it did, it 
would take up a position on the other side of the wall. Many kinds of objects in the 
landscape can intrude between the avatar and the camera, blocking the player’s 
view of her and everything else.
If you choose a third-person perspective, consider one of the following solutions:
■ Place the camera as normal but render the wall (and any other object in the 
landscape that may come between the camera and the avatar) semitransparent. 
This allows the player to see the world from his usual position but makes him 
aware of the presence of the intruding object.
■ Place the camera immediately behind the avatar, between her and the wall, but 
crane it upward somewhat and tilt it down, so the player sees the area immediately 
in front of the avatar from a raised point of view.
■ Orient the camera immediately behind the avatar’s head and render her head 
semitransparent until she moves so as to permit a normal camera position. The 
player remains aware of her position but can still see what is in front of her.
When the player moves the avatar so that an object no longer intrudes, return the 
camera smoothly to its normal orientation and make the object suitably opaque 
again, as appropriate.
PLAYER ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CAMERA
In third-person games, players occasionally need to adjust the position of the cam-
era manually to get a better look at the game world without moving the avatar. If 
you want to implement this, assign two buttons, usually on the left and right sides 
of the controller, to control manual camera movement. The buttons should make 
the camera circle around the avatar to the left or right, keeping her in focus in the 
middle of the screen. This enables the player to see the environment around the 
avatar and also to see the avatar herself from different angles.
Toy Story 2: Buzz Lightyear to the Rescue uses a different adjustment: The left and 
right buttons cause the avatar to pivot in position while the camera sweeps around 
to remain behind his back. This changes the direction the avatar faces,  moves the 
camera, and helps line the avatar up for jumps.
Allowing the player to adjust the camera can help with the problem of intruding 
landscape items, but it is not a real solution; the player would prefer that the cam-
era handle the situation automatically.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

220 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Aerial Perspectives
Games with party-based or multipresent interaction models need a camera model 
that allows the player to see a large part of the game world and several different 
characters or units at once. Normally such games use an aerial perspective, which 
gives priority to the game world in general rather than to one particular character.
In games with multipresent interaction models, you must provide a way for the 
player to scroll the main game view around to see any part of the world that he 
wants (although parts of it may be hidden by the fog of war; see Chapter 14, 
“Strategy Games”). With party-based interaction models, you may reasonably 
restrict the player’s ability to move the camera so that it cannot move away from 
the region of the game world where the party is.
TOP-DOWN PERSPECTIVE
The top-down perspective shows the game world from directly overhead with the 
camera pointing straight down. In this respect, it resembles a map, so players ﬁ nd 
the display familiar. It’s easy to implement using 2D graphics, which keeps its use 
common on smaller devices, but its many disadvantages have led designers to use 
other methods on more powerful machines.
For one thing, this perspective enables the player to see only the roofs of buildings 
and the tops of people’s heads. To give a slightly better sense of what a building 
looks like, artists often draw them cheated—that is, at a slight angle even though 
that isn’t how buildings appear from directly above (see Figure 18.1).
The top-down perspective also distances the player from the events below. He feels 
remote from the action and less attached to its outcomes. It makes a game world 
feel like a simulation rather than a place that could be real.
Designers of computer and console games now usually reserve this perspective for 
showing maps, although it is still common on smaller devices and some web-based 
games. Flight Control, for example, is a hugely popular top-down game for the iPhone.
ISOMETRIC PERSPECTIVE
The isometric perspective is normally used to display 2D outdoor scenes. While the 
top-down perspective looks straight down at the landscape from an elevated posi-
tion, the isometric perspective looks across the landscape from a somewhat lower 
elevation, with the camera tilted down about 30 degrees from the horizontal. If the 
game world is rectilinear, as they usually are in games that use the isometric perspec-
tive, the camera is normally positioned at a 45-degree angle from the north-south 
axis of the landscape. This permits players to see the sides of buildings in the land-
scape, as well as the roof. See Figure 4.5 for a typical example. In the main view, a 
mixed troop of soldiers marches out through a gap in a city wall. You can see two 
sides and the roofs of various buildings around the soldiers.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
221
 CHAPTER 8
Normally, a 2D display engine draws the isometric perspective using interchange-
able tiles of a ﬁ xed size. As a result, the isometric perspective distorts reality 
somewhat because objects that are farther from the camera are not smaller on the 
screen. However, the camera does not display much of the landscape at one time, 
so players don’t mind the slight distortion. The player can truck or dolly the cam-
era above the landscape but cannot pan, tilt, or roll it. You can also allow the player 
to shift the camera orientation to one of the other ordinal points of the compass to 
see other sides of objects in the game world. If you want to provide this feature, the 
artists will have to draw four sets of tiles, one for each possible camera orientation. 
You can also let the player choose an altitude from which to view the world, but 
the artists will have to draw multiple sets of tiles at different scales.
The isometric perspective brings the player closer to the action than the top-down 
perspective and allows him to see the sides of buildings as well as the roofs, so the 
player feels more involved with the world. It also enables him to see the bodies of 
people more clearly. Real-time strategy games and construction and management 
simulations, both of which normally use multipresent interaction models, rou-
tinely display the isometric perspective or its modern 3D equivalent, the 
free-roaming camera. Some role-playing games that use a party-based interaction 
model still employ the isometric perspective (see Figure 15.3).
FREE-ROAMING CAMERA
For aerial perspectives today, designers favor the free-roaming camera, a 3D camera 
model that evolved from the isometric perspective and is made possible by modern 
3D graphics engines. It allows the player considerably more control over the cam-
era; she can crane it to choose a wide or a close-in view; and she can tilt and pan in 
any direction at any angle, unlike the ﬁ xed camera angle of the isometric perspec-
tive. The free-roaming camera also displays the world in true perspective: Objects 
farther away seem smaller. The biggest disadvantage of the free-roaming camera is 
that you have to implement all the controls for moving the camera and teach the 
player how to use them.
CONTEXT-SENSITIVE CAMERA MODELS
Context-sensitive camera models require 3D graphics and are normally used with 
avatar-based or party-based interaction models. In a context-sensitive model, the 
camera moves intelligently to follow the action, displaying it from whatever angle 
best suits the action at any time. You must deﬁ ne the behavior of the camera for 
each location in the game world and for each possible situation in which the avatar 
or party may ﬁ nd themselves.
Ico, an action-adventure game, implements a context-sensitive model, using differ-
ent camera positions in different regions of the world to show off the landscape 
and the action to the best advantage. This makes Ico an unusually beautiful game 
(see Figure 13.7). Context-sensitive models allow the designer to act as a 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

222
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
cinematographer to create a rich visual experience for the player. Seeing game 
events this way feels a bit like watching a movie because the designer intentionally 
composed the view for each location.
This approach brings with it two disadvantages. First, composing a view for each 
location in the game world requires you and your programmers to do a lot more 
work than is needed to implement other camera models. Second, a camera that 
moves of its own accord can be disorienting in high-speed action situations. When 
the player tries to control events at speed, he needs a predictable viewpoint from 
which to do so. The context-sensitive perspective suits slower-moving games quite 
well, and frenetic ones less well. Some games, such as those in the survival horror 
series Silent Hill, use a context-sensitive perspective when the avatar explores but 
switch to a third-person or other more ﬁ xed perspective when she gets into ﬁ ghts.
DESIGN RULE Limit Camera Movement During Frenetic Action
In the early Resident Evil games the camera sometimes jumped to a different point of view 
without warning, right when the player was in the middle of a ﬁ ght. This disoriented the 
player and upset his understanding of the relationship between the controls and the 
screen, often causing him to lose the ﬁ ght. Don’t move the camera in unexpected ways 
during high-speed action. Use a ﬁ xed, or at least a predictable, perspective. 
Other 2D Display Options
This section lists a few approaches to 2D displays that are now seldom used in large 
commercial games on PCs and consoles but still widely found in web-based games 
and on smaller devices. Modern games that intentionally opt for a retro feel, such 
as Alien Hominid and Strange Adventures in Inﬁ nite Space, also use 2D approaches.
■ Single-screen. The display shows the entire world on one screen, normally from 
a top-down perspective with cheated objects. The camera never moves. Robotron: 
2084 provides a classic example. (See the left side of Figure 13.1.)
■ Side-scrolling. The world of a side-scroller—familiar from an entire generation 
of games—consists of a long 2D strip in which the avatar moves forward and back-
ward, with a limited ability to move up and down. The player sees the game world 
from the side as the camera tracks the avatar.
■ Top-scrolling. In this variant of the top-down perspective, the landscape scrolls 
beneath the avatar (often a ﬂ ying vehicle), sometimes at a ﬁ xed rate that the player 
cannot change. This forces the player to continually face new challenges as they 
appear at the top of the screen.
■ Painted backgrounds. Many graphical adventure games display the game world 
in a series of 2D painted backgrounds rather like a stage set. The avatar and other 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
223
 CHAPTER 8
characters appear in front of the backgrounds. The artists can paint these back-
grounds from a variety of viewpoints, making such games more visually interesting 
than side-scrolling and top-scrolling games, constrained only by the fact that the 
same avatar graphics and animations have to look right in all of them. Some use a 
2D/3D combination model in which the background is 2D but the character ani-
mations are rendered with a 3D engine in front of the background. (See Figure 19.2 
for an example.)
Visual Elements
Whichever interaction model and camera model your game offers, you’ll need to 
supply information that the player needs to know by using the visual elements dis-
cussed in this section.
Main View
The player’s main view of the game world should be the largest element on the 
screen. You must decide whether the main view will appear in a window within 
the screen with other user interface elements around it, or whether the view will 
occupy the whole screen and the other user interface elements will appear on top 
of it. We’ll look at these options next. (See also “Choosing a Screen Layout,” earlier 
in the chapter.)
WINDOWED VIEWS
In a windowed view, the oldest and easiest design choice—the main view—takes up 
only part of the screen, with th e rest of the screen showing panels displaying feed-
back and control mechanisms. You ﬁ nd this view most frequently in games with 
complicated user interfaces such as construction and management simulations, 
role-playing games, and strategy games, because they require so many on-screen 
controls (see Figure 15.4 for a typical example). Using a windowed view does not 
mean that feedback elements never obscure the main view, only that they need to 
do so less often because most of them are around the edges. 
The windowed view really does make the player feel as if she’s observing the game 
world through a window, so it harms immersion somewhat. It looks rather like a 
computer desktop user interface, and you see this approach more often in PC games 
than in console games. The loss of immersion matters less when the game requires 
a great deal of control over a complex internal economy and the player needs access 
to all those controls at all times.
OPAQUE OVERLAYS
If you want to create a greater sense of immersion than the windowed view offers, 
you can have the main view ﬁ ll all or almost all of the screen and superimpose 
TIP If you need to 
display text in an 
overlay, as many role-
playing games do, 
use opaque or nearly 
opaque overlays so 
little of the background 
is visible through them. 
Figure 15.5 shows why: 
The semitransparent 
overlay is hard to read 
because the image 
underneath confuses 
the text. Players ﬁ nd it 
irritating to read text 
with graphics under-
neath it, especially 
moving graphics.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

224
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
graphical elements on it in overlays, small windows that appear and disappear in 
response to player commands. The most common type, the opaque overlay, entirely 
obscures everything behind it (see Figure 18.5 for an example). Opaque overlays 
carve a chunk out of the main view, but when they’re gone the player can see more 
of the game world than in a windowed view, and she doesn’t feel as if she’s looking 
through a window.
Action games that don’t need a lot of UI elements on the screen often use borderless
opaque overlays—overlays that don’t appear in a box. Compare the rather old-fash-
ioned windowed view on the left side of Figure 13.2 with the borderless opaque 
overlays on the right side. The overlays obscure only a small part of the main view, 
which otherwise runs edge-to-edge.
SEMITRANSPARENT OVERLAYS
Semitransparent overlays let the player see partially through them (see Figure 8.1
for an example). Semitransparent overlays feel less intrusive than opaque ones and 
work well for things such as instruments in the cockpit-removed view in a ﬂ ight sim-
ulator. However, the bleed-through of graphic material from behind these overlays 
can confuse the information that the overlay presents. You can barely read the 
semitransparent overlay in the upper left corner of Figure 17.5 because it consists
of light colors with a light sky behind. Be sure your overlay isn’t too transparent.
FIGURE 8.1
A semitransparent 
overlay in Guild Wars.
The people and land-
scape are clearly 
visible through the 
overlay.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
225
 CHAPTER 8
Feedback Elements
Feedback elements communicate details about the game’s inner states—its core 
mechanics—to the player. They tell the player what is going on, how she is doing, 
what options she has selected, and what activities she has set in motion.
INDICATORS
Indicators inform the player about the status of a resource, graphically and at a 
glance. This section uses common examples from everyday life as illustrations. The 
meaning of an indicator’s readout comes from labels or from context; the indicator 
itself provides a value for anything you like. Still, some indicators suit certain types 
of data better than others. Choose indicators that ﬁ t the theme of your game and 
ones that don’t introduce anachronisms; a digital readout or an analog clock face 
would both be shockingly out of place in a medieval fantasy.
Indicators fall into three categories: general numeric, for large numbers or numbers 
with fractional values; small-integer numeric, for integers from 0 to 5; and sym-
bolic, for binary, tri-state, and other symbolic values. Here are some of the most 
common kinds of indicators, with their types.
■ Digits. General numeric. (A car’s odometer.) Unambiguous and space-efﬁ cient, a 
digital readout can display large numbers in a small screen area. Digits can’t be read 
easily at a glance, however; 171 can look a lot like 111 if you have only a tenth of a 
second to check the display during an attack. Worse, many types of data the player 
needs—health, energy, and armor strength—can’t be appropriately communicated 
to the player by a number; no one actually thinks, “I feel exactly 37 points strong 
at the moment.” Use digits to display the player’s score and amounts of things for 
which you would normally use digits in the real world: money, ammunition, vol-
umes of supplies, and so on. Don’t use digits for quantities that should feel 
imprecise, such as popularity.
■ Needle gauge. General numeric. (A car’s speedometer.) Vehicle simulations use 
duplicates of the real thing—speedometers, tachometers, oil pressure levels, and so 
on—but few other games require needle gauges. Generally easy to read at a glance, 
they take up a large amount of screen space to deliver a small amount of informa-
tion. You can put two needles on the same gauge if you make them different colors 
or different lengths and they both reﬂ ect data of the same kind; an analog clock is 
a two-needle gauge (or a three-needle gauge if another hand indicates seconds). Use 
needle gauges in mechanical contexts.
■ Power bar. General numeric. (On an analog thermometer, the column of col-
ored ﬂ uid indicating temperature.) A power bar is a long, narrow colored rectangle 
that becomes shorter or longer as the value that it represents changes, usually to 
indicate the health of a character or time remaining in a timed task. (The name is 
conventional; power bars are not limited to displaying power.) When the value 
reaches zero, the bar disappears (though a framework around the bar may remain). 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

226
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
If shown horizontally, zero is at the left and the maximum at the right; if shown 
vertically, zero is at the bottom and maximum is at the top. The chief beneﬁ t of 
power bars is that the player can read the approximate level of the value at a glance. 
Unlike a thermometer, they rarely carry gradations. You can superimpose a second 
semitransparent bar of a different color on top of the ﬁ rst one if you need to show 
two numbers in the same space. Many power bars are drawn in green when full and 
change color to yellow and red as the value indicated reaches critically low levels to 
help warn the player. Power bars are moderately space efﬁ cient and, being themati-
cally neutral, appear in all sorts of contexts. You can make themed power bars; a 
medieval fantasy game might measure time with a graduated candle or an hourglass.
■ Small multiples. Small-integer numeric. (On a mobile phone, the bars indicat-
ing signal strength.) A small picture, repeated multiple times, can indicate the 
number of something available or remaining. Small multiples are traditionally used 
to represent lives remaining in action games; often they appear as an image or sil-
houette of the avatar. Nowadays designers use them for things the avatar can carry, 
such as grenades or healing potions, although you should limit the maximum 
number to about ﬁ ve; beyond that the player can’t take in the number of objects at 
a glance and must stop to count the pictures. To make this method thematically 
appropriate for your game, simply choose an appropriate small picture.
■ Colored lights. Symbolic. (In a car, various lights on the instrument panel.) 
Lights are highly space efﬁ cient, taking up just a few pixels, but they can’t display 
much data; normally they indicate binary (on/off) values with two colors, or tri-
state values with three (off/low/high). Above three values, players tend to forget 
what the individual colors mean, and bright colors are not thematically appropriate 
in some contexts. Use a suitable palette of colors.
■ Icons. Symbolic. (In a car, the symbols indicating the heating and air condition-
ing status.) Icons convey information in a small space, but you must make them 
obvious and unambiguous. Don’t use them for numerical quantities but for sym-
bolic data that record a small number of possible options. For example, you can 
indicate the current season with a snowﬂ ake, a ﬂ ower, the sun, and a dried leaf. 
This will be clear to people living in the temperate parts of the world where these 
symbols are well known, but it will work less well in cultures where snow doesn’t 
fall. The player can quickly identify icons once she learns what they mean, and you 
can help her learn by using a tooltip, a small balloon of text that appears momen-
tarily when the mouse pointer touches an icon for a few seconds without clicking 
it. Don’t use icons if you need large numbers of them (players forget what they 
mean) or if they refer to abstract ideas not easily represented by pictures. In those 
cases, use them with text alongside, or use text instead. Make your icons themati-
cally appropriate by drawing pictures that look as if they belong in your game 
world. The icons in Cleopatra: Queen of the Nile, set in ancient Egypt, are excellent 
(see Figure 4.8).
■ Text indicators. Symbolic. Text represents abstract ideas well, an advantage over 
other kinds of indicators. In Civilization III, for example, an advisor character can 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
227
 CHAPTER 8
offer the suggestion, “I recommend researching Nationalism.” Finding an icon to 
represent nationalism or feudalism or communism, also options in the game, poses 
a problem. On the other hand, some people ﬁ nd text boring, and two words can 
look alike if they’re both rendered in the same color on the same color background. 
The worst problem with text, however, is that it must be localized for each language 
that you want to support. (See “Text” later in this chapter.)
The books of Dr. Edward Tufte give some of the best advice anywhere about con-
veying data to the player efﬁ ciently and readably, particularly The Visual Display of 
Quantitative Information (Tufte, 2001).
MINI-MAPS
A mini-map, also sometimes called a radar screen, displays a miniature version of the 
game world, or a portion of it, from a top-down perspective. The mini-map shows 
an area larger than that shown by the main view, so the player can orient himself 
with respect to the rest of the world. To help him do this, designers generally use 
one of two display conventions: world-oriented or character-oriented mini-maps.
■ The world-oriented map displays the entire game world with north at the top, 
just like a paper map, regardless of the main view’s current orientation. An indica-
tor within the mini-map marks that part of the game world currently visible in the 
main view. (See Figure 4.2 for an example. The small rectangle on the mini-map 
indicates which part of the world is currently showing in the main view.) In a mul-
tipresent game, you can use the world-oriented map as a camera control device: If 
the player clicks the map, the camera jumps to the location clicked.
■ The character-oriented map displays the game world around the avatar, placing 
him at the center of the map facing the top of the screen. If the player turns the 
avatar to face in a new direction in the game world, the landscape, rather than the 
avatar, rotates in the map. These mini-maps don’t show the whole game world, only 
a limited area around the avatar, and as the avatar moves, they change accordingly. 
They’re often round and for this reason are sometimes called radar screens. Because 
the landscape rotates in the map, character-oriented mini-maps sometimes include 
an indicator pointing north, making the map double as a compass.
Because the mini-map must be small (usually 5 to 10 percent of the screen area), it 
shows only major geographic features and minimal non–mission-critical data. Key 
characters or buildings typically appear as colored dots. Areas of the game world 
hidden by the fog of war appear hidden in the mini-map also.
A mini-map helps the player orient himself and warns him of challenges not visible 
in the main view, such as nearby enemies in a strategy or action game or a problem 
developing in a construction and management simulation. Mini-maps typically 
show up in a corner of the screen. You can ﬁ nd them in virtually any game that 
uses aerial perspectives and many others as well. Figures 4.2, 4.5, 4.6, and 4.8 all 
contain mini-maps.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

228
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
COLOR
You can always double the amount of data shown in a numeric indicator by having 
the color of the indicator itself represent a second value. You might, for example, 
represent the speed of an engine with a needle gauge, and the temperature of that 
engine by changing the color of the needle from black to red as it gets hotter. 
Colors work best to display information that falls into broad categories and doesn’t 
require precision within those categories. Consider the green/yellow/red spectrum 
used for safety/caution/danger: It doesn’t display a precise level of safety but con-
veys the general level at a glance. (Note the warnings about color-blind players in 
Appendix A, “Designing to Appeal to Particular Groups.”)
Colors are also very useful for differentiating groups of opponents, however, and 
you can apply them to uniforms and other insignia. This is especially handy if the 
shapes or images of the actual units are identical regardless of which side they’re 
on… as any chess player knows!
You can also use color as a feedback element by placing a transparent color ﬁ lter 
over the entire screen. Some ﬁ rst-person shooters turn the whole screen reddish for 
a few frames to indicate that the avatar has been hit.
Character Portraits
A character portrait, normally appearing in a small window, displays the face of 
someone in the game world—either the avatar, a member of the player’s party in a 
party-based game, or a character the player speaks to. If the main view uses an aer-
ial perspective, it’s hard for the player to see the faces of characters in the game, so 
a character portrait gives the player a better idea of the person he’s dealing with. 
Use character portraits to build identiﬁ cation between your player and his avatar or 
party members and to convey more about the personalities of nonplayer characters. 
An animated portrait can also function as a feedback element to give the player 
information; Doom famously uses a portrait of the avatar as a feedback element,
signaling declining health by appearing bloodier and bloodier. This portrait also 
allows the player to see his avatar even though he is playing a ﬁ rst-person shooter.
Screen Buttons and Menus
Screen buttons and menus enable the player to control processes too complex to 
manage with controller buttons alone. They work best with the mouse as a point-
ing device but can also be used with a D-pad or joystick. Because a console doesn’t 
have a mouse, console games make less use of screen buttons and menus than do 
PC games, one of several reasons why console games tend to be less complex than 
PC games.
Screen buttons and menus should be so familiar to you from your experience with 
personal computers that there is no need to discuss them in detail here, though 
you should keep a couple of key issues in mind. First, putting too many buttons 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
229
 CHAPTER 8
and menus on the screen confuses players and makes your game less accessible to 
casual players (see “Managing Complexity,” earlier in the chapter). Second, unless 
you use the desktop model, try to avoid making your buttons and menus look too 
much like an ordinary personal computer interface. The more your game looks like 
any other Windows or Macintosh application, the more it harms the player’s immer-
sion in the game. Make your screen-based controls ﬁ t your overall visual theme.
Text
Most games contain a fair amount of text, even action games in which the player 
doesn’t normally expect to do much reading. Text appears as a feedback element in 
its own right, or as a label for menu items, screen buttons, and to indicate the 
meaning of other kinds of feedback elements (a needle gauge might be labeled 
Voltage, for example). You may also use text for narration, dialog (including subti-
tles), a journal kept by the avatar, detailed information about items such as 
weapons and vehicles, shell menus, and as part of the game world itself, on posters 
and billboards.
LOCALIZATION
Localization refers to the process of preparing a game for sale in a country other 
than the one for which you originally designed the game. Localizing a game often 
requires a great many changes to the software and content of the game, including 
translating all the text in the game into the target market’s preferred language. In 
order to make the game easily localizable, you should store all the game’s text in 
text ﬁ les and never embed text in a picture. Editing a text ﬁ le is trivial; editing a 
picture is not.
DESIGN RULE Keep Text Separate from Other Content
Never have the programmers build text into the program code. Never build text that the 
player is expected to read into an image such as a texture or a shell screen background. 
Store all text in one or more text ﬁ les.
The only exception to this rule applies to text used purely as decoration when you don’t 
expect the player to read it or understand what it says. A billboard seen in a game set in 
New York should be in English and remain in English even after localization if the bill-
board text doesn’t constitute a crucial clue.
Note that a word and its translation may differ in length in different languages, so 
that a very short menu item in English can turn into a very long menu item in, say, 
German. When you design your user interface, don’t crowd the text elements too 
close together; the translations may require the extra space.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

230 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
TYPEFACES AND FORMATTING
Make your text easily readable. The minimum height for text displayed on a screen 
should be about 12 pixels; if you make the characters any smaller, they became less 
legible. If the game will be localized to display non-Roman text such as Japanese, 
12 pixels is the bare minimum, and 16 pixels is distinctly preferable.
If you’re going to display a lot of text, learn the rules of good typesetting and use 
typefaces (fonts) that have been speciﬁ cally designed for reading on a computer 
screen, such as Verdana. Use mixed uppercase and lowercase letters for any block of 
text more than three or four words long. Players ﬁ nd text set entirely in uppercase 
letters difﬁ cult to read; besides, it looks like SHOUTING, creating a sense of 
urgency you might not want. (On the other hand, in situations that do require 
urgency, such as a warning message reading DANGER, uppercase letters work well.)
Choose your typefaces with care so that they harmonize both with the theme of 
your game and with each other. Avoid using too many different typefaces, which 
looks amateurish. Be aware of the difference between display fonts (intended for 
headlines) such as Impact, and ordinary serif and sans serif fonts (intended for 
blocks of text) such as Times or Arial, respectively.
Avoid monospaced (also called ﬁ xed width) fonts, such as Courier, in favor of propor-
tional fonts, such as Times, unless you need to display a table in which letters must 
line up in columns. For other uses, ﬁ xed-width fonts waste space and look old-fash-
ioned and unattractive.
Audio Elements
This chapter has already mentioned sound brieﬂ y, but this section presents more 
detail, addressing several topics: sound effects, ambient sounds, music, dialog, and 
voiceover narration.
Keep music, sound effects, and recorded speech in separate ﬁ les, and play them 
back through separate channels on the machine. Always include a facility that 
allows the player to adjust the volume level of the music independently from the 
volume level of the other audio effects—including turning one or the other off 
completely. Many players tire of hearing the music but still want to hear the sound 
effects and other sounds. Bear in mind that not all your players will have perfect 
hearing, and the more control you can give them, the better. See “Accessibility 
Issues” in the Appendix, “Designing to Appeal to Particular Groups.”
Sound Effects
The most common use of sound in a game is for sound effects. These sounds corre-
spond to the actions and events of the game world—for example, a burst of gunﬁ re 
or the squealing of tires as a car slides around a corner. In the real world, sound 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
231
 CHAPTER 8
often presents the ﬁ rst warning of approaching danger, so use sound as an indica-
tor that something needs the player’s attention. Suspense movies do this well, and 
you can borrow techniques from them: Play the sound of footsteps or the sound of 
a gun being cocked before the player can see it. You can also use sound to provide 
feedback about aspects of the game under the player’s control, such as judging 
when to change gears in a racing game by listening to the pitch of the engine.
You should also include sound effects as audible feedback in your user interface, 
not just in the game world. At the very minimum, make sure the screen buttons 
make an audible click when pressed, but try to ﬁ nd interface effects that harmonize 
with the theme of your game world as well (as long as they’re not corny). Be sure to 
support audio feedback from the UI with visual feedback too so that when players 
hear a click or beep or buzz, the visual feedback directs them to the issue that gen-
erated the audible signal. We interpret events that we can see more easily than with 
audio alone.
Vibration
Many modern controllers include a vibration feature, which you can use to provide 
sensory feedback (often called rumble) about game events. Although rumble is not 
technically an audio element, the player can usually hear it as well as feel it.
Normally you can control two aspects of the vibration: intensity and duration. Be 
sure to scale these appropriately to the game world phenomenon that they’re asso-
ciated with. Rumble can be very startling when it’s unexpected, which makes it an 
excellent feature for survival horror and stealth games. Don’t use rumble constantly,
or the player will learn to ignore it. Also, if you use rumble too much, the player’s 
hands will begin to tingle unpleasantly.
It’s best to use rumble when something big happens, such as an explosion, or when 
something bad happens, such as when the player’s racing car scrapes the wall of 
the racetrack.
Ambient Sounds
Just as the main view gives the player visual feedback about where she is, ambient 
sounds give her aural feedback. Trafﬁ c sounds tell her that she’s in an urban street; 
cries of monkeys and exotic birds suggest a jungle. Anything that ordinarily makes 
distinctive sounds in the real world, such as a fountain or a jackhammer, should 
make the same sound in your game.
A ﬁ rst- or third-person game should deﬁ nitely use positional audio if the platform’s 
audio devices support it. Positional audio refers to a system in which different 
speakers present sounds at different volume levels, allowing you to position the 
point sources of sound in the three-dimensional space of the world. Some personal 
computers support as many as seven speakers, but even two-speaker stereo can help 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

232 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
a player detect where a sound is coming from. Correctly positioning sound sources 
in the 3D space helps the player orient himself and ﬁ nd things that he may be 
searching for, such as a river, an animal, or another member of the party.
Don’t overuse ambient sounds, especially in games that mostly feature mental 
challenges. A cacophonous environment isn’t conducive to thought. Your ambient 
sounds must also work with the music you choose, which the next section 
addresses. You may also be limited by the capabilities of your audio hardware, 
because some machines support only a small number of channels for simultaneous 
playback; when playing all the sound effects, you may not have channels left to
use for ambient sounds.
Music
Music helps to set the tone and establish the pace of your game. Think about what 
kind of music will harmonize with the world and the gameplay that you’re plan-
ning. Music sends strong cultural messages, and those must also ﬁ t thematically 
with the rest of the game. A pentatonic scale composition for the shamisen (a tradi-
tional Japanese lute) might work well in a medieval Japanese adventure game, but it 
would certainly sound out of place in a futuristic high-tech game. You will proba-
bly collaborate with an audio director to choose or compose music for the game. 
Many larger commercial games now use licensed music from famous bands.
The music doesn’t have to support the game world at every moment; you can 
choose music to create a contrasting effect at times. The introductory movie for 
StarCraft uses classical opera as its theme, set against scenes in which admirals 
calmly discuss the war situation as they prepare to abandon the men on the planet 
below to their fate. The choice of music accentuates the contrast between the opu-
lence and calm of the admiral’s bridge and the hell of war on the surface. In a 
simpler example, the tempo of the music in certain levels of Sonic the Hedgehog is 
out of sync with the pace of the level, which, in a subtle way, makes the game 
harder to play. Don’t overuse these techniques, however; the rarer they are, the 
more effective they are.
In the real world, few pieces of music last as long as an hour, but players may hear 
the same music for several hours at a stretch in a game. Whatever you choose, be 
sure it can tolerate repetition. Avoid background music with a wide dynamic range; 
the louder parts will become intrusive and remind the player that the music 
repeats itself.
For some years, the game industry has experimented with the difﬁ cult problem 
of writing music that changes dynamically in response to current game situations, 
a technique called adaptive music. Adaptive music must follow and even anticipate 
unpredictable situations. Creating adaptive music remains an experimental technique 
for the moment. On the other hand, game musicians have become extraordinarily 
skilled at layering—writing separate but harmonizing pieces of music that the audio 
engine delivers simultaneously by mixing them together at different levels of 
TIP If you would 
like to know more, 
read Audio for Games: 
Planning, Process, 
and Production, by 
Alexander Brandon 
(Brandon, 2004) and 
The Fat Man on Game 
Audio: Tasty Morsels 
of Sonic Goodness, by 
George “The Fat Man” 
Sanger (Sanger, 2003).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
233
 CHAPTER 8
volume. The engine determines which piece should be most clearly heard depend-
ing on what happens in the game.
Dialog and Voiceover Narration
Just about any kind of game can use spoken material to provide information, 
whether it’s narration, dialog, commentary in sports games, units responding to 
orders in strategy games, and so on. From a user interface standpoint, you should 
be aware of two key things that set spoken words apart from other forms of audio 
feedback:
■ Repetitive spoken content rapidly becomes tiresome. The longer the sentence, 
the worse the problem. To solve this, write and record multiple versions for each 
line that is likely to be repeated. You may frequently repeat short clips such as “Aye 
aye, sir” and “Strike three!” (though you should still record several variants), but if 
you want to deliver a longer sentence such as, “Sire, your peasants are revolting!” 
you must either have a large number of variants available or, better yet, play the 
sentence only once when the problem ﬁ rst occurs and then use visual feedback for 
as long as the problem continues. 
■ Writing and acting must be good. You cannot emphasize this enough to your 
writers and audio people. The quality of writing in the vast majority of games 
ranges from terrible to barely passable, and the voice acting is frequently worse 
than the writing. Players tolerate a sound effect that’s not quite right, but an actor 
who can’t act instantly destroys immersion. Don’t use actors whose voices don’t 
work thematically with the material, either. You wouldn’t use the voice of an 
Englishman in a game set in the Old West, so don’t use an American in a game
set in medieval times. The American accent didn’t exist then. Don’t try to get an 
actor to fake a foreign accent, either; hire a native speaker.
Input Devices
So far, this book has placed little emphasis on the game machine’s hardware, 
because the variety of processors, display screens, data storage, and audio devices 
makes it impossible to address the topic comprehensively. In the case of input 
devices, however, certain standards have evolved. It is critically important that
you understand the capabilities, strengths, and weaknesses of the various devices 
because they constitute the means by which your player will actually project his 
commands into the game. Designing for them well makes the difference between 
seamless gameplay and a frustrating experience.
This section concentrates on the most common types of input devices for hand-
held, PC, and console games—the sorts normally shipped with the machine. It 
doesn’t address extra-cost items such as ﬂ ight control yokes, steering wheels, rudder 
TIP For more infor-
mation on writing for 
games, read Game
Writing: Narrative Skills 
for Videogames, edited 
by Chris Bateman 
(Bateman, 2006). 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

234 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
pedals, dance mats, ﬁ shing rods, bongo drums, cameras, and microphones. If you 
build a game that requires these items, you limit the size of your market to a spe-
cialist audience, and there isn’t room to discuss such issues in a work on general 
game design. You should design for the default control devices shipped with a 
machine if at all possible. Only support extra-cost devices if using them signiﬁ -
cantly enhances the player’s experience, or if you are intentionally designing a 
technology-driven game to exploit the device.
For most of their history, input devices for personal computers differed greatly from 
those of game consoles, so the two were best discussed separately. Console games 
never used analog joysticks; PC games never used D-pads. Now, both types of 
machines can use either, so we’ll look at the various input devices independently
of the platforms.
Terminology
The following discussion uses the game industry’s standard terminology for the 
kinds of data that control devices send to the processor as the result of player 
inputs. You may ﬁ nd some familiar terms that nevertheless require explanation, 
because the game industry uses those terms in ways that may differ from what 
you’re used to.
Most input devices—the mouse being a notable exception—default to a neutral 
position. To send a signal to the game, the user must push, pull, grasp, or press the 
device to deﬂ ect it, and a spring-loaded mechanism returns it to the neutral posi-
tion when the player releases the device. Joysticks and D-pads return to center; 
buttons and keys return to the off state.
A device that can return only two speciﬁ c signals is called a binary device, the sig-
nals generally being interpreted as off and on. Another common kind of input 
device transmits a value from a range of many possible values and the industry, for 
historical reasons, calls these analog devices. Any game control device can be classed 
as either analog or binary, though all of the technology is digital.
Don’t confuse the type of data (binary or analog) with the dimensionality of the 
device. A one-dimensional device transmits one datum, and a two-dimensional 
device transmits two data, and so on, regardless of whether they transmit binary
or analog data.
A device that returns data about its current position as measured from the neutral 
position provides absolute values. Such a device—a joystick, for example—can 
travel only a limited distance in any direction, and so it transmits values in a range 
from zero to its maximum.
Other devices offer effectively unlimited travel and have no neutral position. These 
return relative values, that is, the relative distance that the device has traveled from 
its previous position. Mouse wheels and track balls are examples; the player may 
rotate them indeﬁ nitely.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
235
 CHAPTER 8
Three-Dimensional Input Devices
A three-dimensional device delivers three data values simultaneously. Such devices 
are rare but are becoming more common as the game industry begins to adopt 
motion-sensing devices like the Wii Remote.
ACCELEROMETERS
An accelerometer is not a switch or button that the player directly manipulates. It is 
an electronic device that measures the rate of acceleration it experiences. Game 
hardware manufacturers build accelerometers into controllers such as the Wii 
Remote so the player can wave the controller around rather than simply hold it and 
press buttons. With the data from multiple accelerometers, you can compute how 
far and how fast the player moves the remote, and in what direction. The Nintendo 
Wii Remote and Nunchuck, and the Apple iPhone, are the best-known devices that 
use accelerometers in gaming.
When an accelerometer is at rest with respect to the Earth (sitting still on a table, 
for example), it reports the force of gravity. This means that you can also use an 
accelerometer as a tilt sensor. If the acceleration of gravity appears to change direc-
tion, it means the device has been tilted with respect to the ground. You can also 
detect if the player has turned it upside down: The direction of the acceleration of 
gravity will be reversed.
An accelerometer returns absolute acceleration information. If it were in zero grav-
ity and undergoing no acceleration, it would return zero in all three dimensions. 
GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEMS
Global positioning systems have become commonplace in high-end mobile phones, 
and it won’t be long before they are ubiquitous in phones, personal digital assis-
tants (PDAs), and handheld gaming devices. A GPS returns the device’s latitude and 
longitude on the surface of the Earth, as well as the altitude above sea level. The 
player uses a GPS as input to a game by moving the GPS around in the environ-
ment. The UK-based art collective Blast Theory has constructed several augmented 
reality games that use global positioning systems. Players travel around a cityscape 
on foot, carrying a GPS-enabled device that helps them play the game.
GPS devices return absolute positional information. By taking measurements over 
time, you can use this data to compute the player’s speed and direction.
GPS devices have two signiﬁ cant drawbacks at the moment. First, because they 
need to receive data from satellites orbiting the Earth, they only work in areas 
where they can easily receive the satellites’ transmissions—usually outdoors. 
Second, the current generation of GPS technology is only accurate to within
several meters, so they’re only useful on a large scale. The European Galileo satel-
lite navigation system, which is due to come online in 2013, is designed to be 
accurate to the 1-meter range.
NOTE Some devices 
built for non-gaming 
applications need to 
measure acceleration 
in only one or two 
dimensions, so they 
contain simpler accel-
erometers. However, 
motion-sensitive gam-
ing devices routinely 
use accelerometers 
capable of measuring 
acceleration in all 
three spatial dimen-
sions so they can 
detect movement in 
every direction. They 
provide three accelera-
tion data at a time.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

236 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
A REVOLUTIONARY DEVICE: THE NINTENDO WII REMOTE
In the past few years, no piece of hardware has changed the landscape of commercial 
video gaming as dramatically as the Nintendo Wii and its motion-sensitive controller, the 
Wii Remote (often shortened to Wiimote). It implements a number of signiﬁ cant innovations:
• A three-dimensional accelerometer reports how the player is moving the remote.
• An infrared transmitter positioned near the player’s TV and an infrared camera in the 
Wii Remote allow a Wii game to compute the remote’s position relative to the TV. Wii 
games know where the remote is in the room, and approximately where it is pointing. 
As a pointing device, it is not as precise as a mouse, however.
• The remote contains a speaker, so it can make appropriate sounds (golf club, tennis 
racket, gun) right in the player’s hand.
• The relatively small number of buttons on the Wii Remote (as compared to traditional 
controllers such as the PS3 SIXAXIS) makes the remote much less daunting to inex-
perienced players.
• Because the remote uses Bluetooth wireless to communicate with the computer, play-
ers can move around with it as much as they like (as long as they don’t move too far 
from the Wii). This allows for much more active games than the traditional wired con-
troller does.
• The Wii Remote contains a small amount of memory, which lets players store data 
(such as avatar attributes) in the remote itself. A player can use his Wii Remote on 
another player’s Wii machine, and the data he stored will be available to the game.
The Wii Remote also includes several conventional controller features: a D-pad, a trigger, 
several buttons, and a vibration feature. The Nunchuck, an additional device for the play-
er’s other hand, provides another accelerometer, an analog joystick, and two more 
buttons. A new accessory for the Wii Remote, the Wii Motion Plus, adds an angular rate 
sensor to the basic remote. This device provides information about the way the remote 
turns as it moves and makes it more accurate.
No less important than the Wii Remote’s innovations are the games that support it. 
Nintendo deliberately made the Wii Sports games that ship with the Wii easy to learn and 
very forgiving. In the tennis game, for example, the player’s avatar automatically runs to 
where the ball will land. All the player has to do is wave the controller to deliver a fore-
hand or a backhand. The ease of playing these games has made them accessible to many 
people who would never have considered playing video games before. Wii consoles have 
been installed in nursing homes, because the motion-based interaction encourages elderly 
people to exercise. They’re also being used as physical therapy for people recovering 
from injuries. Playing a Wii game is much more appealing than doing repetitive exercises.
continues on next page


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
237
 CHAPTER 8
A REVOLUTIONARY DEVICE: THE NINTENDO WII REMOTE
continued
No less important than the Wii Remote’s innovations are the games that support it. 
Nintendo deliberately made the Wii Sports games that ship with the Wii easy to learn and 
very forgiving. In the tennis game, for example, the player’s avatar automatically runs to 
where the ball will land. All the player has to do is wave the controller to deliver a fore-
hand or a backhand. The ease of playing these games has made them accessible to many 
people who would never have considered playing video games before. Wii consoles have 
been installed in nursing homes, because the motion-based interaction encourages elderly 
people to exercise. They’re also being used as physical therapy for people recovering 
from injuries. Playing a Wii game is much more appealing than doing repetitive exercises.
The Wii Remote works very well in games that map a player’s physical activity directly 
onto the avatar’s activity in the game world, such as action, sports, and driving games. It 
is less successful with games that traditionally use a mouse, such as role-playing, strat-
egy, and construction and management games. If you want your players to control your 
game with the Wii Remote (which works with PCs as well as the Wii itself), you should 
design the game for the Wii Remote from the beginning. 
Two-Dimensional Input Devices
Two-dimensional input devices allow the player to send two data values to the 
game at one time from a single device.
DIRECTIONAL PADS (D-PADS)
Directional pads (D-pads) are the most familiar form of directional control mecha-
nism on game machines and are still offered by many smaller handheld machines 
as the only two-dimensional input device. Console and PC controllers often supply 
a D-pad in addition to a joystick to provide backward compatibility with older 
software.
A D-pad is a circular or cross-shaped input device on a game controller constructed 
with binary switches at the top, bottom, left, and right edges. The D-pad rocks 
slightly about its central point and, when pressed at any edge, turns on either one 
switch or, if the player presses between two adjacent switches, two. It can, therefore, 
send directional information to the game in eight possible directions: up, down, 
left, and right with each of the individual sensors, and upper-left, upper-right, 
lower-left, and lower-right when the player triggers two sensors together. (In Figure 
8.2, the cross-shaped device on the upper-left face of the controller is a D-pad.)


--- PAGE BREAK ---

238 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
The D-pad gives the player a crude level of control over a vehicle or avatar; she is 
able to make the vehicle move in any of the eight major directions but not in any 
other. You should use D-pads for directional control only if you have no better 
device available. D-pads do remain useful alongside a joystick; you can assign func-
tions to the D-pad that require less subtle control, such as scrolling the main view 
window in one of the eight directions, which leaves the joystick free for such tasks 
as avatar navigation control.
JOYSTICKS
A joystick is a single vertical stick anchored at the bottom that can be tilted a
limited amount in any direction. The joystick is spring-loaded and returns to its 
central position if the player lets go of it. When the game software checks the posi-
tion of the joystick, it returns two absolute data: an X-value indicating tilt to the 
left or right, and a Y-value indicating the tilt forward or back.
A joystick offers a ﬁ ner degree of control than a D-pad does. The Sony SIXAXIS 
controller in Figure 8.2 features two small joysticks (the circular objects at the bot-
tom) as well as a D-pad.
Joysticks make ideal steering controls for vehicles. To return to a default activity—
ﬂ ying straight and level, for instance—the player only has to allow the joystick to 
return to the neutral position. Since joysticks may travel only a limited amount in 
any direction, they allow the player to set a direction and a rate of movement. The 
UI interprets the degree of tilt as indicating the rate. For instance, moving a joy-
FIGURE 8.2
The Sony SIXAXIS 
controller
NOTE Modern joy-
sticks built for use with 
combat ﬂ ight simula-
tors may include a 
large number of other 
controller buttons as 
well. All these ulti-
mately amount either 
to binary buttons or 
sliders. This section is 
concerned only with 
the tilting action of the 
basic device.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
239
 CHAPTER 8
stick to the left causes an airplane to roll to the left; moving it farther left causes 
the airplane to roll faster.
Joysticks don’t work well for precise pointing because when the player lets go, the 
joystick returns to center, which naturally causes it to point somewhere else. To 
allow the player to point a cursor at an object and leave it there while she does some-
thing else, use a mouse. Efforts to port mouse-based games to console machines, 
substituting a joystick for the mouse, have an extremely poor success rate.
THE MOUSE (OR TRACKBALL)
We’re all familiar with mice from our experiences with personal computers. A 
mouse returns two data values that consist of X- and Y-values, but these are relative
data, indicating how far the player moved the mouse relative to its previous loca-
tion. A mouse offers more precise positioning than a joystick and unlimited travel 
in any direction on the two-dimensional plane in which it operates. This unlimited 
relative movement makes a mouse ideal for controlling things that can rotate indef-
initely in place, so ﬁ rst-person PC games virtually always use mice to control the 
direction in which the avatar looks. Because it stays where it is put, a mouse is 
invaluable for interfaces in which the player needs to let go of the pointing device 
to do something else.
Note that when a mouse is used speciﬁ cally to control a cursor on the screen, its 
driver software converts the mouse’s native relative data into absolute data for the 
cursor position. This choice of either absolute or relative modes lends the mouse 
great ﬂ exibility.
A mouse wheel constitutes a separate knob with unlimited movement that also 
functions as a controller button when pressed. Not all mice come with mouse 
wheels, however, so you cannot count on players having them. If you support the 
mouse wheel, supply alternative controls.
The mouse’s lack of a neutral position makes it weak as a steering mechanism for 
vehicles that need a default behavior—driving straight or ﬂ ying straight and level. 
The player must ﬁ nd the vehicle’s straight or level position herself rather than 
allowing the device to snap back into neutral. You may want to designate an extra 
controller button that returns the vehicle to its default state if the mouse will be 
your primary control option.
Designers ﬁ nd that mice are generally more ﬂ exible input devices than joysticks, 
but players ﬁ nd them more tiring to use for long periods.
TOUCH-SENSITIVE DEVICES
PDAs, the Nintendo DS machine, and the Apple iPhone offer the player a touch-
sensitive screen, and laptop personal computers usually come with a touch pad 
below the keyboard. These devices return absolute analog X and Y positions to 
indicate where they are touched, as a mouse cursor does. Unlike a mouse, you can 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

240 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
make a touch-sensitive device’s cursor return to a neutral position whenever you 
detect that the player has stopped touching the device. Touch-sensitive screens may 
be manipulated by the ﬁ ngers or a stylus; touch pads usually cannot detect a stylus, 
and must be touched with the ﬁ ngers, which tends to make ﬁ ngers sore after long use.
Early touch-sensitive screens could only detect one touch at a time, but the Apple 
iPhone has perfected the multi-touch interface, which allows the user to touch it in 
several locations at once. This is likely to become increasingly common on new 
handheld devices. The problem of sore ﬁ ngers after extended play remains.
One-Dimensional Input Devices
One-dimensional input devices send a single value to the game. Ordinary control-
ler buttons and keys send binary values; knobs, sliders, and pressure-sensitive 
buttons send analog values.
CONTROLLER BUTTONS AND KEYS
A controller button or a keyboard key sends a single binary value at a time: on when 
pressed and off when released. Despite this simplicity, you can use buttons and 
keys in a variety of ways:
■ One-shot actions. Treat the on signal as a trigger, a message to the game to per-
form some action immediately (ignoring the off signal). The action occurs only 
once, when the player presses the button; to perform it twice, he must press the 
button again. You might use this to let players ﬁ re a handgun, ﬁ ring once each 
time they hit the button.
■ Repeating actions. The on signal tells the game to begin some action and to 
repeat it until it receives the off signal from the same button at a repetition rate 
determined by the software. You could let the players ﬁ re a machine gun continu-
ously from button press to button release.
■ Continuous actions. The button’s on signal initiates a continuous action, and its 
off signal ends it. Golf games use this to give a player control over how hard the 
golfer swings the club; the player presses the button to start the golfer’s backswing 
and releases the button to begin the swing itself; the longer the backswing, the 
harder the golfer hits the ball. Some football games allow the player to tap the but-
ton quickly to throw a short pass or to hold it down for a moment before release to 
throw a long pass, with the length of time between a button’s on and off signals 
determining the distance thrown.
Console game controllers feature anywhere from one to about ten buttons. Buttons 
on the top face of the controller, to be pressed with the thumbs, are known as face 
buttons. Others, known as shoulder buttons, appear on the part of the controller facing
away from the player, under the index ﬁ ngers. Faced with large numbers of buttons,
the player can ﬁ nd it quite difﬁ cult to remember what they all do. Here, as elsewhere,
be sure to maintain consistency from one gameplay mode to another, and if an 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
241
 CHAPTER 8
industrystandard has evolved for your game’s genre, do not depart from it without 
good reason.
Personal computer keyboards have 110 keys, allowing for very broad user interfaces 
indeed. Be sure to assign actions to keys in such a way that the letter printed on the 
key becomes a mnemonic for the action, for example, F for ﬂ aps or B for brakes. 
Players themselves can, if you implement the feature, assign actions to keys, so they 
don’t have to select those functions with mouse clicks. 
KNOBS, SLIDERS, AND PRESSURE-SENSITIVE BUTTONS
You rarely ﬁ nd knobs (also sometimes called Pong paddles for historical reasons) 
nowadays, although the mouse wheel functions as a knob. Limited-travel knobs 
can move only so far, like a volume knob on a stereo, and return an absolute value. 
Unlimited-travel knobs, including the mouse wheel, may be spun continuously and 
return relative data. Knobs are generally not self-centering; they stay where the 
user puts them. Knobs, especially large ones, offer ﬁ ne unidimensional control.
A slider is a small handle that moves along a slot in the controller, which constrains 
its travel. It returns an absolute position and stays where the player puts it. You ﬁ nd 
sliders usually used as adjuncts to joysticks for ﬂ ight simulators; the slider controls 
the throttle for the engine, letting the player set his speed and leave it there.
A few controllers, such as the Nintendo GameCube controller, include analog pres-
sure-sensitive buttons that, instead of transmitting a binary on or off value, send
a number that indicates how hard the player presses. This gives the player a ﬁ ner 
degree of control than an ordinary binary controller button. The trigger buttons
on the Xbox controller also return analog values. You can think of them as spring-
loaded sliders that return to a zero point when released.
COMPASSES
Like global positioning systems, compasses are mostly useful for augmented reality 
games played outdoors. A digital compass returns a single numeric value, the direc-
tion in degrees that a handheld device is facing with respect to true north. If the 
player holding it turns the device in a different direction, the compass detects it. 
Later versions of the Apple iPhone include a compass.
Navigation Mechanisms
Navigation mechanisms allow the player to tell a character, vehicle, or other mobile 
unit how to move. This section uses the term avatar to refer to anything that the 
player controls directly, including vehicles. It also uses the word steering to describe 
the act of directly controlling both vehicles and characters, even though the idea of 
steering a walking character may sound a little odd. UI designers usually ﬁ nd creat-
ing vehicle navigation systems easier than creating ones for characters because input 
devices more closely resemble a vehicle’s controls than they do an avatar’s body.
TIP Don’t try to 
convert a game de-
signed for a knob to 
work with a joystick. 
The joystick’s combi-
nation of limited travel 
and self-centering 
contradicts the game’s 
original design. The 
arcade game Tempest
used a large, heavy 
knob that could be 
spun continuously; 
when ported to a 
console machine with 
a joystick, players 
enjoyed the game less 
despite the improved 
graphics.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

242 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
A navigation mechanism establishes a relationship between the way the player 
moves the controls and the way the avatar responds on the screen. The player learns 
this relationship and uses it until it becomes automatic. When a player gives move-
ment commands, the avatar must respond in a consistent and predictable way. 
Anything that disrupts the player’s understanding of the control relationship, such 
as a sudden change of camera angles, may cause the player to make a steering error.
This section assumes that players steer using a joystick except where otherwise 
indicated; for most purposes, you may consider a joystick interchangeable with a 
D-pad but offering ﬁ ner control. Joystick directions are referred to as up (forward or 
away from the player), down (towards the player), left, and right. Steering wheels 
for cars or control yokes for aircraft aren’t covered here because they should be 
self-explanatory. 
If the player designates a point in the landscape and the character or vehicle moves 
to that target without further player control, the game uses point-and-click navigation.
Screen-Oriented Steering
In screen-oriented steering, when the player moves the joystick up, the avatar 
moves toward the top of the screen. Implementation details vary somewhat 
depending on the camera model. This section documents several major variants.
TOP-DOWN AND ISOMETRIC PERSPECTIVES
In a top-down or isometric perspective in which the player sees the avatar from 
above, moving the joystick up, down, left, or right causes the avatar to instantly 
turn and face the corresponding edge of the screen, and then move in that direc-
tion. Classic arcade games that used a top-down perspective, such as Gauntlet, use 
this simplest of all steering methods.
2D SIDE-SCROLLING GAMES
In traditional side-scrollers, the joystick controls left and right movement as it does 
for the top-down perspective. The player controls the avatar’s vertical jumps to 
platforms using a separate controller button. Moving the joystick up can augment 
the effect of the jump button; moving the joystick down may be left undeﬁ ned; 
and because the game world is 2D, the avatar cannot move away from or toward 
the player.
3D GAMES
Three-dimensional games usually use avatar-oriented rather than screen-oriented 
steering to provide a consistent set of controls regardless of camera angle, but rare 
exceptions do exist. Crash Bandicoot provides the best-known example. When the 
player pushes the joystick up, the avatar moves toward the top of the screen, which 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
243
 CHAPTER 8
is also forward into the 3D environment, away from the player. Moving the joystick 
down makes the avatar turn to face the player and move toward him through the 
3D environment. Pushing the joystick left or right makes the avatar turn to face 
and then move in that direction.
Unlike avatar-oriented steering, in this model, left and right cause the avatar to 
move in those directions while the camera continues to face forward and to show 
the avatar from the side. In this respect, Crash Bandicoot feels rather like a side-
scroller with an additional dimension. In avatar-oriented steering, addressed next, 
left and right cause the avatar to turn and face in those directions but not to move
while the camera swings around to remain behind him.
Avatar-Oriented Steering
In avatar-oriented steering, the only suitable model for ﬁ rst-person games, pushing 
the joystick up causes the avatar to move forward in whatever direction she cur-
rently faces, regardless of her orientation to the screen. However, implementation 
of avatar-oriented steering varies somewhat from one device to another, so the fol-
lowing sections treat these devices individually.
Avatar-oriented steering remains consistent regardless of the camera model. It pres-
ents a slight disadvantage in games using aerial perspectives: Avatar-oriented 
steering can be rather disorienting when the avatar faces the bottom of the screen, 
yet the player must push the joystick up to make the avatar walk down to the bot-
tom of the screen.
JOYSTICK AND D-PAD CONTROLS
As stated earlier, pushing the joystick up makes the avatar move forward in what-
ever direction she faces. Pushing the joystick down makes the avatar move 
backward away from the direction she faces, while continuing to face the original 
direction; that is, she walks backward. In some vehicle simulators, down applies the 
brakes rather than reversing the direction of movement, and the player must press 
a separate controller button to put the vehicle in reverse. Pushing the joystick to 
the left or right makes the avatar turn to face toward the left or right or turns the 
wheels of a vehicle. The avatar does not move in the environment if the joystick 
moves directly to left or right; the player must push the joystick diagonally to get 
forward (or backward) motion in addition to a change of direction. This feels more 
natural with vehicles than it does with characters.
MOUSE-BASED CONTROL
With mouse-based navigation, now standard for ﬁ rst-person PC games, the mouse 
only controls the direction in which the avatar faces, and the player uses the key-
board to make the avatar move. Moving the mouse left or right causes the avatar to 
turn in place, to the left or the right, and to a degree in proportion to the distance 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

244 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
the mouse moves. Up and down mouse movements tilt the camera up or down, 
which becomes important if the player wants the avatar to climb or descend, but 
these commands do not move the avatar. Considerably more ﬂ exible than a joy-
stick-based system, mouse-based navigation allows the player to look around 
without moving the character.
Keys on the PC’s keyboard control movement. The standard arrangement for play-
ers who use their right hands for the mouse and left hands for the keyboard uses
W to produce forward movement in the direction the avatar currently faces; move-
ment continues as long as the player holds the key down. S works similarly for 
moving backward (or applying the brakes). A and D produce movement at right 
angles to the direction the avatar faces, left or right respectively, thus producing 
the feeling of sliding sideways while facing forward. This sideways movement is 
often called straﬁ ng. Left-handed players usually use the arrow keys or the I, J, K, 
and L keys, whose layout mimics the W, A, S, and D keys.
Flying
Flying presents a further complication because it involves moving through three 
dimensions whereas a two-dimensional input device such as a joystick offers con-
trol in only two. Control over movement in the third dimension must be handled 
by a separate mechanism, either extra controller buttons or an additional joystick. 
How you implement this depends on the nature of the aircraft itself, generally 
using the mechanisms in real aircraft as your model. Navigational controls in mod-
ern ﬂ ying games are almost always intended for the ﬁ rst-person perspective from 
inside the cockpit. (See Chapter 17 for further details.)
FIXED-WING AIRCRAFT
The player maneuvers the aircraft using the joystick to pitch (the equivalent of a 
camera’s tilt) or roll the aircraft, and the engine pulls the plane in the direction the 
nose faces. A throttle control, generally a slider or keys that increase and decrease 
the engine speed by ﬁ xed increments, sets the rate of forward movement. When 
ﬂ ying straight and level, forward on the joystick pushes the nose down, producing 
descent, and back pulls the nose up, causing it to climb. Left on the joystick causes 
the plane to roll to the left while remaining on the same course; right rolls it to the 
right in the same manner. To turn in the horizontal plane, the pilot rolls the air-
craft in the desired direction and pulls the joystick back at the same time, so the 
nose follows the direction of the roll, producing a banked turn. When the joystick 
returns to center, the plane should ﬂ y straight and level at a speed determined by 
the throttle.
HELICOPTERS
Game user interfaces typically simplify helicopter navigation, which is more com-
plicated than ﬂ ying ﬁ xed-wing aircraft. The joystick controls turning and forward 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

USER INTERFACES 
245
 CHAPTER 8
or backward movement, and a slider control or keys cause the helicopter to ascend 
or descend. Left on the joystick causes the helicopter to turn counterclockwise 
about its vertical axis but not to actually go in that direction unless it is also mov-
ing forward. Right causes the equivalent rotation to the right. Forward propels the 
helicopter forward, and back the reverse. When the joystick returns to center, the 
helicopter should gradually slow down through air friction until it remains hover-
ing above a ﬁ xed point in the landscape. A separate key set or slider controls 
vertical movement.
SPACECRAFT
Most designers treat spacecraft as they would ﬁ xed-wing aircraft, although in one 
variant left or right on the joystick causes the vehicle to yaw (the equivalent of pan-
ning a camera), turning about its vertical axis to face in a different direction, rather 
than rolling.
Point-and-Click Navigation
Aerial or context-sensitive camera models in which the player can clearly see his 
avatar, party, or units as well as a good deal of the surrounding environment can 
use point-and-click navigation. In a game with a multipresent or party-based inter-
action model, the player ﬁ rst chooses which unit or units should move (unnecessary
in an avatar-based model), then in all cases the player selects a destination in the 
environment, and the unit or avatar moves to that location automatically using a 
pathﬁ nding algorithm (an artiﬁ cial intelligence technique to avoid obstacles). 
Typically the player can select one of two speeds: When the player selects a loca-
tion, the avatar walks to it, but if he holds down a special key while selecting the 
location, the avatar runs rather than walks.
This technique is most often used in real-time strategy and party-based role-play-
ing games in which many units may need to be given their own paths and the 
player does not have time to control them all precisely. If a unit cannot get to the 
location the player designated, that unit either goes as far as it can and then stops 
or, upon receipt of the command, warns the player that it cannot proceed to an 
inaccessible destination.
Using point-and-click navigation, the player can indicate precisely where he wants 
the unit to end up without concerning himself about avoiding obstacles, a conve-
nience in cluttered environments where the player may not clearly see which 
objects actually block the path. It is also helpful in context-sensitive camera models 
because the player cannot always see clearly how the avatar should get from one 
place to another and often has no freedom to move the camera.
At times, it can be a disadvantage that the player cannot control the path that the 
unit takes, so allow the player to designate intermediate points, called waypoints,
that the unit must pass through one by one on its way to the ﬁ nal destination. 
NOTE Real helicop-
ters can also slide 
sideways while facing 
forward; to implement 
this would require 
extra controls, which 
few games do.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

246 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Waypoints enable the player to plot a route for the unit and so exercise some con-
trol over how the units get to where they are going.
Allowing for Customization
One of the most useful, and at the same time easiest to design, features you can 
offer your player is to allow him to customize his input devices to suit himself. 
Normally you handle this via a shell menu, although a few PC games store the 
information in a text ﬁ le that the player can edit. These are two of the most com-
monly offered customizations:
■ Swap left and right mouse buttons. If the mouse has more than one button, 
left-handed and right-handed players may need different layouts. Providing a mir-
ror image of your standard layout takes little trouble, so don’t make players go 
through a function-reassignment process just for this; give them a feature that 
allows them to simply swap the current assignments.
■ Swap the up and down directions of the mouse or joystick in ﬁ rst-person 3D 
games. Some players like to push the mouse or joystick up to make their avatar 
look up (an idea borrowed from screen-oriented steering in 2D games); others like 
to pull it down to look up (an idea borrowed from airplane joysticks). Let the player 
play as she prefers.
The term degrees of freedom refers to the number of possible dimensions that an 
input device can move through. An ordinary key or button has one degree of
freedom: It can only move up and down. A joystick or mouse has two degrees
of freedom: It can move up and down, left and right. The Wii Remote has three 
degrees of freedom. If two devices, both binary or both analog (see the discussion 
in “Input Devices” earlier), have the same degree of freedom, you can generally
let the player interchange them, although there will be practical difﬁ culties if one 
device is self-centering and the other is not or if one allows unlimited travel and 
the other does not. When exchanging assignments between two devices not identi-
cal in every way, some functionality or convenience is almost always lost.
Almost all games assign some of their player actions to particular keys or buttons. 
Your game should include a key reassignment shell menu that allows players to 
assign actions to the keys they prefer. If your game includes menus, also allow
the player to assign menu items to keys so he can select them quickly without 
using the mouse. You may need to enforce some requirements: If the game requires 
a particular action to be playable (for example, the ﬁ re-weapon action in a shooter 
game), warn the player if he tries to exit the shell menu with the action still 
unassigned.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

