250 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
5. What camera model will the main view use? What interaction model does the 
gameplay mode use? Is it one of the common ones or something new? How does 
the camera model support the interaction model?
6. Does the game’s genre, if it has one, help to determine the user interface? What 
standards already exist that the player may be expecting the game to follow? Do 
you intend to break these expectations, and if so, how will you inform the player of 
that?
7. Does the game include menus? What is the menu structure? Is it broad and shal-
low (quick to use, but hard to learn) or narrow and deep (easy to learn, but slow to 
use)?
8. Does the game include text on the screen? If so, does it need provisions for 
localization?
9. What icons does the game use? Are they visually distinct from one another and 
quickly identiﬁ able? Are they culturally universal?
10. Does the player need to know numeric values (score, speed, health)? Can these 
be presented through nonnumeric means (power bars, needle gauges, small multi-
ples), or should they be shown as digits? If shown as digits, how can they be 
presented in such a way that they don’t harm suspension of disbelief? Will you 
label the value and if so, how?
11. What symbolic values does the player need to know (safe/danger, locked/
unlocked/open)? By what means will you convey both the value and its label?
12. Will it be possible for the player to control the game’s camera? Will it be neces-
sary for the player to do so in order to play the game? What camera controls will be 
available? Will they be available at all times or from a separate menu or other 
mechanism?
13. What is the aesthetic style of the game? How do the interface elements blend in 
and support that style?
14. How will audio be used to support the player’s interaction with the game? What 
audio cues will accompany player actions? Will the game include audio advice or 
dialog?
15. How does music support the user interface and the game generally? Does it cre-
ate an emotional tone or set a pace? Can it adapt to changing circumstances?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 CHAPTER 9
Gameplay
Chapter 1, “Games and Video Games,” deﬁ ned gameplay as consisting of the chal-
lenges and actions that a game offers: challenges for the player to overcome and 
actions that let her overcome them. Games also include actions unrelated to game-
play, but the essence of gameplay remains the relationship between the challenges 
and the actions available to surmount them.
This chapter begins by discussing how we make games fun, setting out some things 
you need to be aware of and principles you need to observe. Next we’ll look at some 
important ideas related to gameplay: the hierarchy of challenges and the concepts 
of skill, stress, and difﬁ culty. The bulk of the chapter consists of a long list of types 
of challenges that video games offer, with some observations about how you might 
present them, mistakes you should avoid, and how you can adjust their difﬁ culty. 
We’ll turn next to actions, listing a number of common types found in games. 
Finally, we’ll examine the questions of if, when, and how to save the game.
Making Games Fun
As Chapter 1 asserted, the game designer’s primary goal is to provide entertain-
ment, and gameplay is the primary means by which games entertain; without 
gameplay, an activity may be fun, but it is not a game. Entertainment is a richer 
and more manifold idea than fun is. Nevertheless, most games concentrate on 
delivering fun rather than offering moving, thought-provoking, or enlightening 
entertainment. How, then, do we provide fun?
Execution Matters More Than Innovation
Genius is one percent inspiration, ninety-nine percent perspiration.
—THOMAS EDISON (ATTRIBUTED)
For games, the proportions are a little different from Edison’s proportions for 
genius, but the idea is the same. Most of what makes a game fun has nothing to do 
with imagination or creativity. The vast majority of things that make a game not
fun—boring or frustrating or irritating or simply ugly and awkward—result from 
bad execution rather than a bad idea. A surprising amount of the job of making a 
game fun, therefore, simply consists of avoiding those things that reduce fun. 
Here’s a list, from most to least important, showing how the different aspects of 
game development contribute to fun:
251
CHAPTER 9


--- PAGE BREAK ---

252
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ Avoiding elementary errors is the most important thing you can do. Bad pro-
gramming, bad music and sound, bad art, bad user interfaces, and bad game design 
all ruin the player’s fun. Find and ﬁ x those bugs! 
■ Tuning and polishing are the second-most important aspects of making a game 
fun. This means paying attention to detail, getting everything perfect. Dedicated 
tuning sets a good game apart from a mediocre one.
■ Imaginative variations on the game’s premise contribute to the player’s fun. 
Take the basic elements of the game and construct an enjoyable experience out of 
them. Level designers do most of this work.
■ True design innovation is perhaps ﬁ ve percent of the source of a game’s fun. 
Design innovation encompasses the game’s original idea and subsequent creative 
decisions that you make.
The smallest and most mysterious part of the fun in a game emerges from an 
unpredictable, unanalyzable, unnamable quality—call it luck, magic, or stardust. 
You can’t make it happen, so you might as well not worry about it. But when you 
can feel it’s there, be careful about making changes to your design from that point 
on. Whatever it is, it’s fragile.
So innovation by the game designer contributes only a small part of the fun of the 
game. That may make it sound as if there’s not a lot of point in game design. But to 
build a game, someone must design it and design it well. Most game design deci-
sions give little room for innovation, but they’re still necessary. A brilliant architect 
may design a wonderful new building, but it still needs heat and light and plumb-
ing, and in fact, the majority of the work required to design that building goes into 
creating those mundane but essential details. The same is true of game design.
Finding the Fun Factor
There’s no formula for making your game fun, nothing that anyone can set out as a 
reliable pattern and tell you that, if you just slide in a really cool monster here and 
a fabulously imaginative weapon there, the resulting game is guaranteed to be fun 
every time. But there is a set of principles to keep in mind as you design and build 
your game; without them, you risk producing a game that’s no fun.
■ Gameplay comes ﬁ rst. Before all other considerations, create your game to give 
people fun things to do. A good many games aren’t fun because the designers spent 
more time thinking about their graphics or their story than they did thinking 
about creating gameplay.
■ Get a feature right or leave it out. It is far worse to ship a game with a broken 
feature than to ship a game with a missing feature. Shipping without a feature 
looks to players like a design decision; a debatable decision, possibly, but at least a 
deliberate choice. Shipping with a broken feature tells players for certain that your 
team is incompetent. Broken features destroy fun.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
253
 CHAPTER 9
■ Design around the player. Everything in this book is based on player-centric
game design, as Chapter 2, “Design Components and Processes,” explains in detail. 
You must examine every decision from the player’s point of view. Games that lose 
sight of the player lose sight of the fun.
■ Know your target audience. Different groups of players want different things. 
You don’t necessarily have to aim for the mass market, and in fact it’s much harder 
to make a game that appeals broadly than it is to make a game that appeals to a 
niche market you know well. But whatever group you choose, know what they want 
and what they think is fun, and then provide it.
■ Abstract or automate parts of the simulation that aren’t fun. If you model 
your game on the real world, leave out the parts that aren’t fun. But remember your 
audience: To somebody who just wants a chance to drive a fast car, changing the 
tires isn’t fun, but to a hardcore racing fan, changing the tires is fun and a critical 
part of the experience. If—and only if—you have the time and resources, you may 
include two modes. Otherwise, choose one market and optimize the fun for the 
members of that market.
■ Be true to your vision. If you envision the perfect sailing simulation, don’t
add powerboat racing as well because you feel that adding features might attract a 
larger market. (Marketing people are notorious for asking game designers to do 
this.) Instead, adding powerboats will distract you from your original goal and cut 
in half the resources you were planning to use to perfect the sailing simulation. 
Both halves will be inferior to what the whole could have been. You will lose the 
fun, and without it you won’t get the bigger market anyway.
■ Strive for harmony, elegance, and beauty. A lack of aesthetic perfection 
doesn’t take all the fun out of a game, but the absence of these qualities appreciably 
diminishes it. And a game that is already fun is even more fun if it’s beautiful to 
look at, to listen to, and to play with.
The Hierarchy of Challenges
When you’re up to your __ in alligators, it’s hard to remember that your original objective 
was to drain the swamp.
—UNATTRIBUTED
In all but the smallest games, the player faces several challenges at a time, orga-
nized in a hierarchy of challenges. Ultimately, he wants to complete the game. To 
accomplish that, he must complete the current mission. Completing the mission 
requires completing a sub-mission, of which the current mission probably has sev-
eral. At the lowest level, he wants to deal with the challenge that immediately faces 
him: the enemies threatening him at the moment, perhaps, or the locked door for 
which he needs the right spell. These lowest-level challenges are called atomic chal-
lenges (atomic in the sense of indivisible). Atomic challenges make up sub-missions; 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

254 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
FIGURE 9.1
A hierarchy of chal-
lenges for a small 
action-adventure game
WIN THE GAME
Win Fight
Find Item
Win Fight
Win Fight
Solve
Puzzle
Find Item
Win Fight
Bargain
Successfully
Win Fight
Solve
Puzzle
Win Fight
Win Fight
Win Fight
Win Fight
Win Fight
Explore
Maze
Solve
Puzzle
Win Fight
Find Item
Win Big
Fight
Solve
Puzzle
Solve
Puzzle
Destroy
Object
Rescue
NPC
DEFEAT
LEVEL BOSS
DEFEAT
LEVEL BOSS
DEFEAT
FINAL BOSS
1. Find Item
Mission
1. Win Big Fight 
Mission
1. Solve Puzzle 
Mission
2. Solve Puzzle 
Mission
2. Destroy
Object Mission
2. Rescue NPC
Mission
3. Defeat Level 
Boss Mission
3. Defeat Level 
Boss Mission
3. Defeat Final 
Boss Mission
Complete
Level 2
Complete
Level 3
Complete
Level 1


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
255
 CHAPTER 9
sub-missions make up missions; and missions make up the ultimate goal: complet-
ing the game.
Figure 9.1 illustrates this idea. It displays the hierarchy of challenges for a (very) 
small action-adventure game. The entire game consists of three missions or game 
levels; each level consists of three sub-missions, the last of which pits the player 
against a level boss. Each sub-mission consists of three atomic challenges, of which 
the ﬁ nal one (in bold text) completes the sub-mission. The gray boxes indicate the 
challenges the player faces simultaneously at one particular moment in the middle 
of level 2. At the atomic level, you ﬁ nd him trying to solve a puzzle; doing so will 
help him to—or allow him to proceed to—destroy the critical object, all of which 
contributes to succeeding in the Destroy Object sub-mission, which itself makes up 
a part of winning level 2. Ultimately, he hopes to win the entire game.
To design your game, you create this hierarchy and decide what challenges the 
player will face. During play, the player focuses most of her attention on the atomic 
challenges immediately facing her, but the other, higher-level challenges will 
always be in the back of her mind. Her awareness of the higher-level challenges
creates anticipation that plays an important role both in entertaining her and in 
guiding her to victory. The remainder of this section discusses how the hierarchy 
affects the player’s experience and what that means for game design.
Informing the Player about Challenges
Video games normally tell the player directly about some challenges, called explicit 
challenges, and leave her to discover others on her own, which are called implicit 
challenges. In general, games give the player explicit instructions about the topmost 
and bottommost levels of the hierarchy but leave it to her to ﬁ gure out how to 
approach the intermediate levels. The topmost level includes the victory condition 
for the entire game, and games tend to present their overall victory condition 
explicitly. They may also state an explicit victory condition for each level. 
Normally, the game’s tutorial levels teach the player explicitly how to meet the 
atomic challenges. (For more on tutorial levels, see the discussion on that topic in 
Chapter 12, “General Principles of Level Design.”) Unless you provide completely 
self-explanatory gameplay and controls, you should always include one or more 
tutorial levels in your game or an explanation of the controls and how to use them 
to meet atomic challenges.
You should always tell the player about the victory condition or she won’t know 
what she’s trying to accomplish. You don’t have to tell the complete truth, how-
ever. In storytelling games, you usually want to keep the outcome a surprise. Many 
stories start by telling the player one thing, but plot twists along the way deepen 
and complicate matters. She may change or meet a goal only to ﬁ nd it replaced by 
another, more important goal. Detective stories, in particular, are famous for this. 
(Don’t do it more than three or four times in any one story, though, or the player 
will start to become irritated about being repeatedly lied to. Detectives are also 
NOTE Game designer 
Ben Cousins proposed 
this notion of a hier-
archy but in a slightly 
different form. For
more information on 
Cousins’s original 
scheme, see the 
sidebar “Cousins’s 
Hierarchy” later in
this chapter.
TIP Make the victory 
condition and the 
atomic challenges 
explicit. Be sure the 
player always has 
some overarching goal 
in mind toward which 
she works. Never leave 
her without a reason 
for continuing to play. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

256 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
famous for getting irritated about being lied to.) Be sure that the player gets what-
ever information she needs to think she clearly knows the victory condition so she’s 
never left without any motivation.
The Intermediate Challenges
Most designs leave intermediate-level challenges implicit. If you give the player 
nothing to do except follow explicit instructions, it doesn’t feel like a game; it feels 
like a test. Part of the player’s fun lies in ﬁ guring out—whether through explora-
tion, through events in the story, or by observing the game’s internal economy—
what he’s supposed to do. Armed with the knowledge of both the victory condition 
at the top and the right way to meet the atomic challenges at the bottom, he has 
the tools to ﬁ gure out the intermediate challenges—if you have constructed them 
coherently. (See the section “Avoid Conceptual Non Sequiturs” in Chapter 12 for an 
example of how not to construct an intermediate-level challenge.)
DESIGN RULE  Reward Victory No Matter
How the Player Achieves It
Players will think of things to try that you might not have anticipated; even if you’ve given 
them multiple ways to win, they may ﬁ nd another way entirely. If the player achieves the 
victory condition, even in a completely unexpected way, he deserves credit for it. Don’t 
test to see if he got there in one of the ways that you intended; just test to see if he got 
there. Of course, the game should prevent any form of cheating that it can reasonably 
control–but ﬁ nding an unusual way to win is not cheating so long as it is equally avail-
able to all players.
For a good many games, overcoming the intermediate-level challenges requires 
only that the player meet all the lowest-level ones in sequence. That’s how most 
action games work, and what Figure 9.1 illustrates. If the player beats all the ene-
mies and gets past all the obstacles, he ﬁ nishes the level. If he ﬁ nishes all the levels, 
he wins the game.
In more complex games, the player may have a choice of ways to approach an inter-
mediate-level challenge. Suppose the explicit top-level challenge—the victory 
condition—in a war game consists of defeating all the enemy units, and the atomic 
challenge consists of destroying one enemy unit. The simple and obvious strategy 
is apparently to destroy all the enemy units one by one, but the player isn’t likely to 
get that chance. Most war games include a production system for generating new 
units, so even if the player can kill off enemy units one by one, his opponent can 
probably produce new ones faster than he can destroy them. Disrupting the ene-
my’s production system is often an effective strategy, while protecting his own 
production system ensures that he can eventually overwhelm the enemy with 
superior numbers. Neither the speciﬁ cation of the victory condition nor the atomic 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
257
 CHAPTER 9
challenges explicitly includes the intermediate-level challenge of disrupt the enemy’s 
production system, and protecting his own production system doesn’t destroy enemy 
units at all. The player must ﬁ gure out what he should do by observing and deduc-
ing and, by planning and experimenting, ﬁ nd ways to accomplish his goals. Obser-
ving, deducing, planning, and experimenting all add to the fun.
You construct these implicit, intermediate challenges for the player to ﬁ gure out. 
The conventions of the genre you choose guide you, but keep in mind that the 
most interesting games offer multiple ways to win. To give your player a richer 
experience, design your game so that he can win in a variety of ways—so that 
meeting different intermediate challenges will still get him to victory. Different 
strategies may be better or worse, but if you only permit one right way to win, you 
don’t reward the player’s lateral thinking skills. The game becomes an exercise in 
reading the designer’s mind.
Figure 9.2 illustrates the idea of offering multiple ways to win a war game. The vic-
tory condition is to capture the ﬂ ag. The hierarchy is organized as before, except 
that the dotted lines indicate a choice of possible approaches rather than a sequence of 
required sub-missions as in Figure 9.1. The gray boxes indicate the challenges in the 
player’s mind at one particular moment—in this case, we assume that he chose to 
use a stealth approach and sent units out to scout.
Simultaneous Atomic Challenges
Although the player simultaneously faces several challenges in the hierarchy, she 
pays less attention, on a moment-by-moment basis, to those challenges that are far-
ther up in the hierarchy. But games can also present several atomic challenges at 
once. These divide the player’s attention. If she can deal with them one at a time
FIGURE 9.2 
A hierarchy of 
challenges with 
multiple options
CAPTURE ENEMY FLAG
Divert Enemy 
Attention
Capture Flag
STEALTH APPROACH
Destroy Enemy 
Production
Win Fights
Capture Flag
AGGRESSIVE APPROACH
Defend Own 
Production
Win Fights
Capture Flag
DEFENSIVE APPROACH
Scout Unguarded 
Route to Flag


--- PAGE BREAK ---

258 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
at her own pace (as in a turn-based game), then they’re not really different from 
sequential challenges, but if she has to surmount them all in a limited amount of 
time, then adding simultaneous challenges makes the game more stressful. (Stress 
is discussed in the next section, “Skill, Stress, and Absolute Difﬁ culty.”)
COUSINS’S HIERARCHY
Ben Cousins, in an article for Develop magazine, suggested thinking of gameplay as a 
hierarchy (Cousins, 2004). This book adopts his idea but modiﬁ es it somewhat and uses 
different terminology. Cousins referred, for example, to atoms of interaction rather than 
atomic challenges.
Cousins studied the game Super Mario Sunshine by making a video recording of the 
screen while he played, then examining the results in a video editor, which enabled him 
to identify the atoms of interaction in the game. By thinking about what he was trying to 
accomplish at each moment as he played, he found that he could organize the gameplay 
into a ﬁ ve-level hierarchy with “Complete the whole game” as the topmost interaction, 
“Complete the current game level” as the second level of the hierarchy, and so on down 
to individual atoms of interaction at the bottom level.
Cousins studied an action game; action games typically require players to use speciﬁ c 
low-level actions to meet low-level challenges (to get across the chasm, jump). In other 
genres, however, there isn’t a one-to-one mapping between challenges and actions even 
at the atomic level. Some challenges may be overcome by several different kinds of 
actions; overcoming others requires complex sequences of actions. Accordingly, actions 
don’t appear in the hierarchy, only challenges.
You should try Cousins’s technique of analyzing the way that games organize their game-
play by examining them second by second in a video editor; it’s a valuable technique for 
understanding gameplay.
An early and still common way of creating simultaneous atomic challenges, typical 
of side-scrolling shooter games, consisted of bombarding the player with enemies. 
Each enemy represents a signiﬁ cant risk, and the player must defeat each one while 
fending off the others. A player who works quickly can generally defeat these added 
enemies one at a time while keeping the others at bay.
Other games present more complex and interrelated simultaneous challenges. In its 
default mode, SimCity imposes no victory condition; its highest-level challenge is to 
achieve economic growth so the player can expand his city. (Expanding the city 
itself isn’t a challenge, just a series of choices available so long as the player brings 
in enough money to keep going.) The player doesn’t attain economic growth unless 
he can provide a balanced supply of services to the city. The city needs police pro-
tection and power and hospitals and water and so on, all at the same time; each 
represents an atomic challenge, and the player must meet all of 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
259
 CHAPTER 9
these simultaneously. The complex juggling of competing needs requires regular 
attention and frequent action. Furthermore, unlike ﬁ ghting enemies, the player 
can never ﬁ nish balancing the services; the juggling act never stops.
It’s part of your job to design the hierarchy of challenges and decide how many of 
them the player will face at once: both vertically up the hierarchy and at the bot-
tom of the hierarchy. The more simultaneous atomic challenges he will face under 
time pressure, the more stressful the game will be. The more different levels of 
challenge he will have to think about at once—especially if he can’t simply achieve 
the higher ones by addressing the lower ones in sequence—the more complex and 
mentally challenging the game will be.
Skill, Stress, and Absolute Difﬁ culty
Chapter 11, “Game Balancing,” addresses gameplay difﬁ culty in detail, but this 
chapter introduces some important concepts because the terms involved come up 
in a discussion of different types of gameplay later in this chapter. While these are 
not industry standard terms, you should ﬁ nd them useful.
This chapter is concerned with controlling the absolute difﬁ culty of the challenges 
that you will present to the player. Two different factors determine the absolute dif-
ﬁ culty of a challenge: intrinsic skill required and stress. Chapter 11 addresses additional 
factors that affect the player’s perceptions about how easy or hard the game is. 
Intrinsic Skill
The intrinsic skill required by a challenge is deﬁ ned as the level of skill needed to sur-
mount the challenge if you give the player an unlimited amount of time in which to do 
it. You can compute the intrinsic skill required for a challenge by taking the condi-
tions of the challenge and leaving out any element of time pressure. How you 
measure the skill level of a challenge varies with the type of challenge and can 
involve physical tasks, mental tasks, or both. Consider three examples:
■ An archer aiming at a target requires a certain level of skill to hit the target. It 
takes more skill to hit the target if you move the target farther away or make it 
smaller. The archer gets an unlimited amount of time to aim. Even if he takes more 
time, it does not change the skill required.
■ Sudoku puzzles printed in the newspaper often include a rating that indicates 
whether they are easy or hard to solve. The player may take as long as he wants to 
solve the puzzle, so the rating reﬂ ects an intrinsic quality of the puzzle—how many 
clues the player gets—rather than the effect of a time limit.
■ A trivia game requires the player to know certain factual knowledge. Some ques-
tions are about familiar facts and some are about obscure facts. The skill level 
required by a question doesn’t change if you give the player more time to answer.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

260 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Some challenges must include time pressure by the way they are deﬁ ned—a test of 
the player’s reaction time, for example. A test of pure reaction time (hit the button 
when the light comes on) requires no intrinsic skill at all. The carnival game Whac-
a-Mole is a real-world example.
Stress
If a challenge includes time pressure, a new factor comes into play: stress. Stress 
measures how a player perceives the effect of time pressure on his ability to meet a 
challenge requiring a given level of intrinsic skill. The shorter the time limit, the 
more stressful the situation. Succeeding in a stressful game requires both quick 
reﬂ exes and a quick mind. The challenges of Tetris do not require a great deal of 
intrinsic skill—if the player had plenty of time to think about the task, it would be 
easy to keep the blocks from piling up—but Tetris is stressful because the player 
must complete the task under time pressure. Golf, on the other hand, demands skill 
without being stressful—at least, in the sense of heavy time pressure. It would be 
considerably more stressful if the rules imposed more time pressure.
Games often create physical stress on the player’s body. Time pressure requires play-
ers to use their eyes and hands more quickly; it makes them stiffen their muscles, 
and it raises their heart rates and adrenaline levels. Many people love this sensa-
tion, but you should modulate the pacing of your game to give them time to rest. 
Chapter 12 discusses this in more detail in the section “Vary the Pacing.”
Absolute Difﬁ culty
Absolute difﬁ culty refers to intrinsic skill required and stressfulness put together. 
When a game offers multiple difﬁ culty levels, the easy mode both demands less 
skill and exerts less stress than the hard mode. Some players like a challenge that 
demands a lot of skill but they can’t tolerate much stress. If they know they have 
plenty of time to prepare for a challenge, they’re perfectly happy for the challenge 
to require great skill. Others thrive on stress but don’t have much skill. Simple, 
high-speed games like Tetris and Collapse! suit them best. Figure 9.3 shows a graph 
of the relationship of intrinsic skill and stress in various games or tasks. The higher 
the task ranks on both scales, the greater its difﬁ culty.
When you’re deciding how difﬁ cult you want your game to be, think about both 
skill levels and stress, and keep your target audience in mind. Teenagers and young 
adults handle stress better than either children or older adults because teenagers 
and young adults have the best vision and motor skills. When you allow the player 
to set a difﬁ culty level for the game, try to preserve an inverse relationship between 
skill level and stress at that particular level of difﬁ culty. If a challenge requires 
more skill, give the player longer to perform it, and vice versa.
NOTE The absolute 
difﬁ culty of a challenge 
consists of a combina-
tion of the intrinsic 
skill required to meet 
the challenge without 
time pressure and the 
stress added by time 
pressure. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
261
 CHAPTER 9
Commonly Used Challenges
This section presents categories of commonly used challenges you should under-
stand. Because games can set a top-of-the-hierarchy challenge of just about 
anything—take on the role of Jason and win the golden ﬂ eece, use your zombie 
army to drive the werewolves out of your ancestral home, capture a giant squid 
from the ocean depths, win a rodeo competition—this book can’t discuss all the 
possible top-of-the-hierarchy goals. The discussion here focuses on lower-level chal-
lenges, many of which could be classiﬁ ed as atomic challenges.
These categories may help you to think about the kinds of traditional challenges 
you’d like to include in your game, but you’re free to design any type of challenge 
you can imagine if you can make it workable. Players always appreciate innovative 
challenges; a beautiful setting or interesting overall concept only gets you so far. 
Gameplay is in the challenges.
This section includes observations from time to time about ways to make a particu-
lar type of challenge easier or harder. Most of these comments concentrate on 
making them easier because novice game developers frequently make their games 
too hard without realizing it.
FIGURE 9.3
Intrinsic skill required 
versus stress in 
different tasks
Intrinsic Skill (independent of time pressure)
Stress (the effect of time pressure)
Real-Time Strategy Games
Cardiac Surgery
Golf
Chess
Adventure Games
Tic-tac-toe
Action-Adventures
First-Person Shooters


--- PAGE BREAK ---

262 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Physical Coordination Challenges
Physical coordination challenges test a player’s physical abilities, most commonly 
hand-eye coordination. One of the earliest coin-op video games, Pong, required 
only this one skill to win. Physical coordination challenges remain a basic compo-
nent of arcade gaming and a signiﬁ cant part of most video games to this day. They 
fall into several subcategories, which the following sections discuss.
The absolute difﬁ culty of a physical coordination challenge most frequently relates 
to the amount of time pressure the player is under; to make such a challenge easier, 
simply give the player more time. Each subcategory addresses exceptions when 
they occur.
SPEED AND REACTION TIME
Speed challenges test the player’s ability to make rapid inputs on the controls, and 
reaction time challenges test his ability to react quickly to events. Both of these 
usually appear in combination with other types of challenges, most often other 
coordination challenges. You can expect to ﬁ nd speed and reaction time challenges 
in platform games, shooters, and fast puzzle games such as Tetris. From the frenetic 
button-banging of Konami’s 1983 arcade game Track & Field (two buttons con-
trolled an athlete’s legs; the player pressed them alternately to make the athlete 
run) to the modern-day frenzy of the latest Quake game, speed and reaction time 
challenges perennially please those who have the reﬂ exes for them.
ACCURACY AND PRECISION
Steering and shooting comprise the majority of tests of accuracy or precision, 
though you can devise many more. Steering includes navigating characters as well 
as vehicles. Usually found in action and action-adventure games, sports games, and 
vehicle simulations, accuracy and precision challenges increasingly feature in role-
playing games, such as the Fable series, which include a combat element. Brain 
training games, which are intended to sharpen a player’s mental and motor skills, 
often include accuracy and precision challenges to test the player’s hand-eye coor-
dination. Because brain training games are not usually aimed at conventional 
gamers, the challenges are seldom characterized as steering or shooting. 
Accuracy challenges need not take place within time limits; in a sport such as 
archery, athletes may take as long as they want to line up a shot but still face a con-
siderable challenge. To make an accuracy challenge easier or harder, adjust the 
degree to which the physics engine in the game forgives errors in the inputs. For 
example, the player of an archery game ordinarily needs to position the joystick or 
mouse within a particular range of values to hit the bull’s-eye; you can make the 
game easier by widening that range.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
263
 CHAPTER 9
INTUITIVE UNDERSTANDING OF PHYSICS
Vehicle simulations require more than just an ability to steer a vehicle; they also 
require an intuitive understanding of the physics of the game world. Players must 
learn, usually through experience, a car’s braking distance, acceleration rate, at 
what rate it may take a turn without sliding off the road, and so on. Learning and 
internalizing these features of the game world and the vehicle constitute another 
challenge. Games such as pool and darts also require the player to develop an intui-
tive understanding of physics. These appear under physical coordination challenges 
because the player tends to develop a visceral rather than an intellectual under-
standing of these aspects of the game world (darts players don’t need to know 
calculus), which ﬁ nds its expression in successful physical coordination.
You can help the player develop an intuitive understanding of the game’s physics. 
First, make sure the physics remains consistent. The physics engine must be reliable 
and produce predictable results. Programmers handle the physics engine, but you 
should also keep this in mind. Second, the simpler the physical model of the world, 
the easier it will be for the player to develop that intuitive understanding. Sports 
games often simplify their physics to help the player. For example, many sports 
games don’t implement the physical property of inertia for an athlete running 
under the player’s control because the player wants to be able to turn his player 
instantaneously and will ﬁ nd it harder to get used to the game if he cannot. Flight 
simulators, too, model the physics of ﬂ ight with greater and lesser degrees of accu-
racy depending on how easy the designer wants to make it for the player to 
understand how the airplane behaves.
TIMING AND RHYTHM
Side-scrolling action games rely heavily on timing challenges, in which the player 
learns to dodge swinging blades and attack predictable enemies. Rhythm chal-
lenges, tests of the player’s ability to press the right button at the right time, feature 
in dance games such as Dance Dance Revolution and other music-based games such 
as Donkey Konga and Guitar Hero. The popularity of rhythm-based games resulted in 
a signiﬁ cant aftermarket in specialty input devices such as dance mats and elec-
tronic conga drums.
COMBINATION MOVES
Many ﬁ ghting games require complex sequences of joystick moves and controller-
button presses that, once mastered, allow the player’s avatar to perform some 
especially powerful feat. (See the section “Fighting Games” in Chapter 13, “Action 
Games.”) Executing a combo move requires speed, timing, and a good memory, 
too: The player has to remember the button sequence and produce it perfectly at 
just the right time. You can make combination moves easier by shortening them, 
requiring fewer presses.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

264 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Logic and Mathematical Challenges
Logical and mathematical reasoning has been part of gameplay since the dawn of 
human history. Logic provides the basis for strategic thinking in any turn-based 
game of perfect information and many other games in which the player can make 
precise deductions from reliable data. This section is conﬁ ned to logic puzzles. The 
“Strategy” section, later in the chapter, deals with strategic thinking.
Mathematics underlies all games in which chance plays a role or the player does
not have reliable data and so must reason from probabilities. Such games present 
explicit mathematical challenges to the player: If he doesn’t compute the odds 
when playing poker, or at least know the odds and reason correctly given what he 
knows, he’s much more likely to lose.
In the broadest sense, any game that includes numeric relationships offers a mathe-
matical challenge, because the player must learn how those relationships work. 
Much of the time, games present mathematical challenges implicitly, couching 
numeric relationships in other terms: physics, strategy, or economics. (For an
example about strategy, see the section “Production Rates, Unit Numbers, and 
Lanchester’s Laws” in Chapter 14, “Strategy Games.”) Other sections of this chapter 
deal with implicit mathematical challenges.
FORMAL LOGIC PUZZLES
A puzzle is a mental challenge with at least one speciﬁ c solution. Formal logic means 
classic deductive logic in which the deﬁ nition of the puzzle contains, or explains, 
everything the player needs to know to solve the puzzle. A formal logic puzzle can 
be solved by reasoning power alone. It shouldn’t require any outside knowledge. 
Many other types of puzzles require logic too, but they also expect the player to 
supply some additional information.
A logic puzzle typically presents the player with a collection of objects related in 
ways that are consistent but not directly obvious. To solve the puzzle, the player 
must put the objects into a speciﬁ ed conﬁ guration. The player manipulates the 
objects and receives feedback about their relationships, which he eventually comes 
to understand by observation and deduction. Rubik’s Cube, a classic logic puzzle 
with a simple mechanism, consists of so many cubes that move in ways so intri-
cately interrelated that it is quite difﬁ cult to solve.
Adventure games often present logic puzzles as combination locks or other machin-
ery that the player must learn to manipulate because those devices make sense in 
the fantasy world in which the game exists. Other puzzle-based games don’t try to 
be realistic but concentrate on offering an interesting variety of challenges.
To adjust the difﬁ culty of a logic challenge, raise or lower the number of objects to 
be manipulated and the number of possible ways in which the player can manipu-
late them. A Rubik’s Cube with four tiles per side (a 2 ✕ 2 ✕ 2 cube) instead of nine 
(3 ✕ 3 ✕ 3) would be far easier to solve.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
265
 CHAPTER 9
Players normally get all the time they need to solve puzzles. Because different peo-
ple bring differing amounts of brainpower to the task, requiring players to solve a 
puzzle within a time limit might make the game impossible for some. Exceptions to 
this rule can sometimes succeed; ChuChu Rocket! offers both a time-limited multi-
player mode and an untimed mode.
A few games do not make the correct solution clear at the outset of the puzzle. The 
player not only has to understand how the puzzle works but she also has to guess at 
the solution she must try to achieve. This is bad game design: It forces the player to 
solve the puzzle by trial and error alone because there’s no way to tell when she’s 
on the right track. In order to open the stone sarcophagus at the end of Inﬁ del, the 
player had to ﬁ nd the one correct combination of objects out of 24 possible combi-
nations. The game gave no hints about which combination opened the box; the 
player simply had to try them all.
DESIGN RULE Avoid Trial-and-Error Solutions
Solving most logic puzzles requires a certain amount of experimentation, but the player 
must be able to make deductions from his experiments. Do not make puzzles that can only
be solved by trial and error.
MATHEMATICAL CHALLENGES
Games don’t usually test the player’s mathematical abilities explicitly but often do 
require the player to reason about probabilities. Many games include an element of 
chance or require the player to make educated guesses about situations of which he 
has only an imperfect knowledge. Consider Microsoft Hearts (see Figure 9.4) as an 
example of a game giving imperfect information. Initially, the player does not 
know what cards the other players hold, but a skilled player can work out to a rea-
sonable degree of certainty what those cards must be by using the information 
revealed as cards are passed and played during the game.
FIGURE 9.4
Microsoft Hearts


--- PAGE BREAK ---

266 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Races and Time Pressure
In a race, the player attempts to accomplish something before someone else does, 
whether that involves a physical race through space or a race to create a structure, 
to accumulate something, or to do practically anything as long as the game can 
distinguish which player ﬁ nishes ﬁ rst. Normally we think of races as peaceful, 
involving competition without conﬂ ict, but races can be combined with ﬁ ghting 
and many other kinds of challenges.
Time pressure discourages careful strategic thought and instead encourages direct, 
brute-force solutions. With only 15 seconds to get through a host of enemies and 
disarm a bomb, the player won’t stop to pick off enemy units one by one with snip-
ing shots; he’s going to mow them down and charge through the gap, even if that 
means taking a lot of damage.
Time pressure increases the stress on a player and changes the feeling of the game-
play considerably, sometimes for better and sometimes for worse. In something like 
a car racing game, time pressure is an essential part of the experience, but use cau-
tion in adding time pressure to challenges that aren’t ordinarily based on time 
constraints. You will deter some players entirely and make the challenge more difﬁ -
cult in any case. To keep the absolute difﬁ culty level constant, whenever you 
increase the time pressure on a player, you should also reduce the amount of intrin-
sic skill required.
Factual Knowledge Challenges
Direct tests of the player’s knowledge of factual information generally occur only in 
trivia and quiz games. In any other type of game, you must either present all the 
factual knowledge required to win the game somewhere in the game (or the man-
ual) or make it clear in the game’s marketing materials that players will need some 
factual knowledge. It’s not fair to require the player to come up with some obscure 
fact from the real world in order to make progress through the game; doing so also 
detracts from full immersion.
Note the difference between factual knowledge challenges and conceptual reason-
ing challenges (discussed in the later section, “Conceptual Reasoning and Lateral 
Thinking Puzzles”). If an adventure game features a puzzle the player can’t solve 
without knowing that helium balloons rise or that metal objects conduct electricity, 
such a puzzle is a conceptual reasoning challenge, not a factual knowledge challenge.
Memory Challenges
Memory challenges test the player’s ability to recall things that she has seen or heard 
in the game. Adventure games and role-playing games often make use of memory 
NOTE Trivial Pursuit,
the popular board 
game that tests play-
ers’ factual knowledge 
in several different 
domains, also runs 
as a video game on a 
variety of platforms.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
267
 CHAPTER 9
challenges. Players can defeat memory challenges by taking notes, so you may want 
to impose a limit on the length of time you give them to memorize material they 
must recall. To make a memory challenge easier, give them longer to memorize it 
and ask that they recall it soon after memorizing it rather than much later.
Memory challenges often form one component of exploration challenges. In 
Raven’s Star Trek Voyager: Elite Force, for example, the player must remember the
layout of complex tunnels onboard the Borg cube.
DESIGN RULE  Make It Clear When
Factual Knowledge Is Required
If your game requires factual knowledge from outside the game world to win, you must 
make this clear to the player in advance.
Pattern Recognition Challenges
Pattern recognition challenges test the player’s ability to spot visible or audible pat-
terns or patterns of change and behavior. One of the most common instances of a 
pattern recognition challenge crops up in action games when a large number of 
identical enemies, each of which behaves in a predictable way, confronts the player. 
The player can try alternative strategies until he ﬁ nds one effective against that 
enemy, then use that strategy to vanquish any number of enemies that attack using 
the same pattern. To make things harder and more interesting, the boss enemy at 
the end of a level usually has a different and more complex pattern of behavior 
from the smaller enemies that preceded it.
Visual clues often ﬁ gure in pattern recognition challenges. In the original Doom,
the player could ﬁ nd secret doorways by searching for areas of wall that looked 
slightly different from the norm. Brain Spa, a brain training game, requires the 
player to match pairs of similar-looking objects while under time pressure. 
To make pattern recognition challenges easier, make the patterns shorter, simpler, 
and more obvious. To make them harder, make the patterns longer, more intricate, 
and more subtle.
Exploration Challenges
Exploration is often its own reward. Players enjoy moving into new areas and see-
ing new things, but exploration cannot be free of challenge or it becomes merely 
sightseeing. Design obstacles that make the players earn their freedom to explore.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

268 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
SPATIAL AWARENESS CHALLENGES
The most basic form of exploration challenge simply requires the player to learn 
her way around an unfamiliar and complicated space. In the old text adventure 
games, this was particularly difﬁ cult because the games lacked visual cues, but even 
modern 3D environments can be made so tangled that they’re hard to navigate. 
Unfamiliar architecture also challenges the player; navigation is easier when things 
look the way she expects them to look. Descent required the player to move around 
a warren of similar corridors inside an asteroid and complicated matters further by 
setting the environment in zero gravity, so the player perceived no obvious up or 
down to help her orient herself.
To make spatial awareness challenges easier, give the player a map that always 
shows his location precisely within the game world. If you want to give the player a 
map but also make it slightly more difﬁ cult, give him a map of the game world that 
doesn’t include his location, so he has to determine his location from landmarks.
LOCKED DOORS
Locked door is a generic term for any obstacle that prevents the player from proceed-
ing through the game until he learns the trick for disabling it. A sheet of ice covering 
a cave entrance that melts if you build a ﬁ re constitutes a locked door for game 
design purposes. Assuming, for discussion only, you want an actual door, you can 
require that the player ﬁ nd a key elsewhere and bring it back, ﬁ nd and manipulate 
a hidden control that opens the door, solve a puzzle built into the door, discover a 
magic word that opens the door, defeat the doorkeeper in a test of skill, or perform 
some other task—just make sure you offer an interesting and fresh challenge.
Avoid using an unmarked switch far from the door. Doom featured these, and they 
weren’t much fun. Arriving at a locked door and seeing no means of opening it or 
any clue, the player had to search the entire world pressing unmarked switches at 
random, returning to see whether one of the switches had opened the door. Worse 
yet, in a few cases, the switch did open the door, but only for a little while. If the 
player didn’t get back to the door in time, he found it locked again and assumed 
that switch must not be the right one.
TRAPS
A trap is a device that harms the player’s avatar when triggered—possibly killing 
her or causing damage—and, in any case, discourages her from going that way or 
using that move again. Similar to a locked door with higher stakes, a trap poses an 
actual threat. Traps can take a variety of forms:
■ Some ﬁ re once and then are harmless.
■ Others ﬁ re and require a certain rearming time before they can ﬁ re again.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
269
 CHAPTER 9
■ Still others respond to particular conditions but not to others, like a metal detec-
tor at an airport, and the player must learn what triggers the trap and how to avoid 
triggering it.
A player may simply withstand some traps that don’t do too much damage; he may 
disarm or circumvent other traps. A trap the player can ﬁ nd only by falling into it 
is really just the designer’s way of slowing the player down; if you make these, don’t 
make many of them because the player can only ﬁ nd them by trial and error and 
they become frustrating after a while. For players, the real fun comes in outwitting 
traps: ﬁ nding and disabling them without getting caught. This gives players a plea-
surable feeling of having outfoxed the game.
MAZES AND ILLOGICAL SPACES
A maze is an area in which every place looks alike, or mostly alike; to get out, the 
player must discover how the rooms or passages relate to each other, usually by 
wandering around. Good designers implement mazes as logic or pattern-
recognition puzzles in which the player can deduce the organization of the mazes 
from clues found in the rooms. Poor mazes offer no clues and make the player ﬁ nd 
the way out by trial and error. Mazes are now considered rather old-fashioned and 
difﬁ cult to justify in the context of a story, but they can still be fun to solve if you 
make them truly clever and attractive.
In illogical spaces, areas do not relate to each other in a way that the player might 
reasonably expect. In text adventures, a player sometimes ﬁ nds that going north 
from area A takes him to area B, but going south from area B does not take him 
back to area A. Illogical spaces require the player to keep a map, because he can’t 
rely on his common sense to learn his way around. Now also considered outdated, 
and more difﬁ cult to implement with today’s 3D engines, illogical space challenges 
still crop up from time to time. If you use them, do so sparingly, and only if you 
can explain their presence: “Beware! There is a rip in the fabric of space-time!”
TELEPORTERS
Teleporters superseded illogical spaces in the game designer’s toolkit. A teleporter is 
any mechanism that suddenly transports the player from where she is to someplace 
else, often without warning if the designer created no visual representation for the 
teleporter device. Several hidden teleporters in an area can make exploration difﬁ -
cult. Teleporters can further complicate matters by not always working the same 
way, teleporting the player to one place the ﬁ rst time they are used but to some 
other place the second time, and so on. You can also use one-way teleporters if you 
want to leave the player with no way to get back.
To make the exploration challenge created by teleporters easier, make the teleporter 
predictable and reversible, so the player can return at will to where she came from. 
(A good many games include teleporters not as a challenge but as a visible and optional 
feature to let the player jump across large distances that she has already explored.)


--- PAGE BREAK ---

270 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
FINDING HIDDEN OBJECTS
Many games require the player to ﬁ nd an object hidden somewhere in their simu-
lated space, often in areas that are difﬁ cult to get to. Sometimes the objects are 
hidden in reasonable places that the player can deduce from clues; sometimes they 
are in obscure ones. The player not only has to learn his way around, he has to 
keep a sharp lookout for whatever he needs. A number of puzzle games use a vari-
ant of the “ﬁ nd the hidden object” challenge in which the player doesn’t move 
through a simulated space, but simply looks at a picture of a room with dozens of 
objects in it, trying to ﬁ nd the ones required, sometimes against a time limit. This 
works well in games for casual players who want an uncomplicated point-and-click 
puzzle, rather like the printed “spot the differences” challenges often found in chil-
dren’s puzzle books.
Easter eggs are a specialized variant of hidden objects. They’re items, or sometimes 
hidden regions or game features, that are fun to discover but not actually needed to 
win the game—a bonus such as special clothing for the avatar or an extra-powerful 
weapon. Players love ﬁ nding Easter eggs. You should hide them in particularly 
obscure locations.
Conﬂ ict
A conﬂ ict challenge is one requiring the direct opposition of forces, some of which 
are under player control. If one player must beat the others by opposing or imped-
ing them directly, the challenge qualiﬁ es as conﬂ ict, even without combat or 
violence. Checkers has no bloodshed but still presents conﬂ ict challenges. Classic 
activities to overcome conﬂ ict challenges include taking away another player’s 
resources and impeding another player’s ability to act.
CONFLICT CHALLENGES VERSUS CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Formal game theory is a ﬁ eld of mathematics that studies situations that contain a con-
ﬂ ict of interest. By that deﬁ nition, any game in which players are rivals for victory 
contains conﬂ ict. However, in pole-vaulting, darts, and many other games, that opposi-
tion applies only at the top of the challenge hierarchy. At lower levels, the players do not 
(and sometimes are forbidden to) impede each other directly. Even in Monopoly, the rules 
provide no means by which players may choose to target each other for hostile action. 
Such games may contain a conﬂ ict of interest but no conﬂ ict challenges. The players 
must achieve their top-level goal not through the direct opposition of forces but through 
vaulting over the higher bar, throwing darts more accurately, or whatever other atomic 
challenges the game speciﬁ es.
The asymmetric board game Fox and Geese that Chapter 1 introduces gives the two 
players different conﬂ ict challenges. The fox tries to eat the geese by jumping over 
them on the board (taking away the other player’s resources). The geese try to trap 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
271
 CHAPTER 9
the fox while moving in conﬁ gurations that prevent the fox from jumping over 
them (preventing the enemy from acting).
Create interesting conﬂ ict challenges by varying such factors as these:
■ The scale of the action (from individuals to whole armies)
■ The speed at which the conﬂ ict takes place (from turn-based, allowing the play-
ers all the time they want, to frenetic activity as in action games)
■ The complexity of the victory conditions (from simple survival to complex mis-
sions with goals and subgoals)
Many action games focus on the immediate, visceral excitement of personal con-
ﬂ ict. The player generally controls an avatar that battles directly against one or 
more opponents, often at high speeds.
Conﬂ ict challenges can be broken down into strategy, tactics, logistics, and other 
components.
STRATEGY
Strategy means planning, including taking advantage of your situation and 
resources, anticipating your opponent’s moves, and knowing and minimizing your 
weaknesses. A strategic challenge requires the player to carefully consider the game 
(a process called situational analysis) and devise a plan of action. In a turn-based 
game of perfect information (one that contains no element of chance or hidden 
information), players may use pure strategy to choose their moves by analyzing pos-
sible future states of the game. Chess is a classic game of perfect information. (In 
formal game theory, pure strategy has a special meaning, but we’ll use the term in 
an informal sense to distinguish it from applied strategy.)
Succeeding in a game of pure strategy requires a talent for systematic reasoning 
that relatively few people possess in a high degree. Computer game developers usu-
ally aim to attract a broad audience, so few of them offer these kinds of challenges. 
Instead, they hide information from the player and include elements of chance, 
making situational analysis to some extent a matter of guesswork and of weighing 
probabilities rather than a matter of logic. Such games call for applied strategy. 
Real-time strategy (RTS) games normally require applied strategy and offer eco-
nomic and exploration challenges as well, making RTS games accessible to players 
with less skill at logic and providing other ways to win besides strategy alone.
TACTICS
Tactics involve executing a plan, accomplishing the goals that strategy calls for. 
Tactics also require responding to unexpected events or conditions: new informa-
tion or bad luck. A player might have a strategy for defeating his opponents in 
poker, but he uses tactics to decide how to play each particular hand.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

272 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
You can design a purely tactical game with no strategy. A small-squad combat game 
in which the soldiers continually move into unknown territory contains no oppor-
tunities for strategy—a player can’t plan if she doesn’t know where she’s going or 
what she’s up against—but contains many opportunities for tactics, such as keeping 
soldiers covered, taking advantage of their particular skills, and so on.
LOGISTICS
The business of supporting troops in the ﬁ eld and bringing fresh troops to the front 
lines is called logistics. Most war games don’t bother with logistical challenges such 
as transporting food and fuel to where the troops can use them; players tend to 
ﬁ nd combat entertaining but ﬁ nd logistics a boring distraction from the combat.
Modern RTS games routinely include one important logistical challenge: weapons 
production. Unlike war board games in which the players often start with a ﬁ xed 
number of troops, RTSs require the players to produce weapons and to research 
new types of weapons using a limited amount of raw material. The players must 
construct and defend the production facilities themselves. Adding this new logisti-
cal challenge to what was formerly a purely combat-oriented genre changed the 
face of war gaming. (See Chapter 14.)
In role-playing games, the limited size of the characters’ inventories presents 
another logistical challenge, requiring players to decide what to carry and what to 
leave behind. Equipping and balancing a party of heterogeneous characters with all 
that they need to face a dangerous adventure occupies a signiﬁ cant amount of the 
player’s time.
SURVIVAL AND REDUCTION OF ENEMY FORCES
The fundamental challenge in any game based on conﬂ ict is survival. The player 
must preserve the effective playing time—the lives—of his units, or he cannot 
achieve the victory condition. In a few games, survival itself constitutes the victory 
condition regardless of other achievements, but in most, survival is necessary, but 
not sufﬁ cient, to win.
The converse of the survival challenge is the challenge to reduce enemy forces. To 
design such a challenge, you must create rules that determine how a unit may be 
removed from the game. Chess and checkers provide examples of such rules: cap-
ture by replacement and capture by jumping, respectively. War games implement 
simulated combat using complex mathematical models and track the health of 
each unit, which may be reduced by repeated attacks until reduction to zero 
destroys the unit.
DEFENDING VULNERABLE ITEMS OR UNITS
The player may be called upon to defend other units or items, especially items that 
cannot defend themselves. In chess, all units protect the king. To meet such a 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
273
 CHAPTER 9
challenge requires that the player know not only the capabilities and vulnerabili-
ties of her units but also those of the entity she must protect. She must be prepared 
to sacriﬁ ce some units to protect the vital one.
STEALTH
The ability to move undetected, an extremely valuable capacity in almost any kind 
of conﬂ ict, especially if the player takes the side of the underdog, can form a chal-
lenge in its own right. Games occasionally pose challenges in which the victory 
condition cannot be achieved through combat but must be achieved through 
stealth. Thief: The Dark Project was designed entirely around this premise. It 
required players to achieve their missions by stealth as much as possible and to 
avoid discovery or combat if they could.
Stealth poses a considerable problem in the design of artiﬁ cial opponents for war 
games. In a game with no stealth, the AI-driven opponent has access to the com-
plete state of the game world; to include stealth, you must restrict the opponent’s 
knowledge, limit its attention, leave it ignorant of whole regions of the game world. 
You decide what the AI opponent does and doesn’t know and deﬁ ne what steps it 
takes, if any, to gain further information.
Economic Challenges
An economy is a system in which resources move either physically from place to 
place or conceptually from owner to owner. This doesn’t necessarily mean money; 
any quantiﬁ able substance that can be created, moved, stored, earned, exchanged, 
or destroyed can form the basis of an economy. Most games contain an economy of 
some sort. Even a ﬁ rst-person shooter boasts a simple economy in which the player 
obtains ammunition by ﬁ nding it or taking it from dead opponents and consumes 
it by ﬁ ring his weapons. Health points are also part of the economy, being con-
sumed by hits and restored by medical kits. You can make the game easier or harder 
by adjusting the amount of ammunition and number of medical kits so that a 
player running short of ﬁ repower or health must carefully manage his resources.
The behavior of resources, as deﬁ ned by the core mechanics of the game, creates 
economic challenges. Some games, such as SimCity, consist almost entirely of eco-
nomic challenges. Such games tend to have ﬂ attened challenge hierarchies in 
which the atomic challenges appear similar to the overall goal of the game. Other 
games, such as ﬁ rst-person shooters, combine economic challenges with others 
such as conﬂ ict and exploration. Chapter 10, “Core Mechanics,” addresses the 
internal economies of games at length. 
ACCUMULATING RESOURCES
Many games challenge the player to accumulate something: wealth, points, or any-
thing else deemed valuable. Acquisition of this kind underlies Monopoly and many 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

274 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
other games in which the top-level challenge is to accumulate more money, pluto-
nium, or widgets than other players. The game challenges the player to understand 
the mechanisms of wealth creation and to use them to his own advantage. In the 
case of Monopoly, the player learns to mortgage low-rent properties and use the 
cash to purchase high-rent ones because high-rent properties produce more in the 
long run.
ACHIEVING BALANCE
Requiring your players to achieve balance in an economy gives them a more inter-
esting challenge than simply accumulating points, especially if you give them many 
different kinds of resources to manage. Players in The Settlers games juggle quantities 
of raw materials and goods that obey complex rules of interaction: Wheat goes to the 
mill to become ﬂ our, which goes to the bakery to become bread; bread feeds miners 
who dig coal and iron ore, which goes to the smelter to become iron bars, which 
then go to the blacksmith to become weapons; and so on. Produce too little of a vital 
item and the whole economy grinds to a halt; produce too much and it piles up, taking 
up space and wasting time and resources that could be better used elsewhere.
CARING FOR LIVING THINGS
A peculiar sort of economic challenge involves looking after a person or creature, 
or a small number of them, as in The Sims and Spore. (Spore expands to whole popu-
lations in its later stages.) The game challenges the player to meet the needs of each 
individual and possibly improve its development. Because the game measures and 
tracks these needs via numeric terms, and the player must meet them from limited 
resources, these qualify as economic challenges.
Conceptual Reasoning and Lateral Thinking Puzzles
Conceptual reasoning puzzles and lateral thinking puzzles are in the same section 
because they both require extrinsic knowledge, that is, knowledge from outside the 
domain of the challenge itself. This sets them apart from formal logic puzzles in 
which all the knowledge required to solve the puzzle must be contained within its 
deﬁ nition. Lateral thinking puzzles and conceptual reasoning puzzles may still 
require the use of logical thinking, however.
CONCEPTUAL REASONING
Conceptual reasoning puzzles require the player to use his reasoning power and 
knowledge of the puzzle’s subject matter to arrive at a solution to a problem. In one 
round of the online multiplayer game Strike a Match, a number of words or phrases 
appear, and as they do, the player must ﬁ nd conceptually related pairs: if Kong
appears, should the player watch out for a match with King (a movie) or Hong (a 
place) or Donkey (a video game)?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
275
 CHAPTER 9
Another sort of conceptual challenge occurs in mystery or detective games in 
which the player must examine the evidence and deduce which of a number of
suspects committed the crime and how. In the game Law and Order, based on the 
television series of the same name, players follow clues, ignore red herrings, and 
arrive at a theory of the crime, assembling the relevant evidence to demonstrate 
proof. In order to succeed, however, the players must have some familiarity with 
police forensic techniques as well as an understanding of human motivations for 
committing crimes. These details are extrinsic knowledge, not spelled out as part
of the deﬁ nition of the puzzle.
You may ﬁ nd designing conceptual reasoning challenges a lot of fun because they 
offer a lot of scope to the designer, but you’ll work harder when creating these than 
putting together simpler trials such as physical or exploration challenges.
LATERAL THINKING
Lateral thinking puzzles are related to conceptual reasoning puzzles, but they add a 
twist: The terms of the puzzle make it clear to the player that what seems to be the 
obvious or most probable solution is incorrect (or the necessary elements to achieve 
the obvious solution are unavailable). The player must think of alternatives instead. 
A classic test of lateral thinking—and one used to demonstrate that chimpanzees 
possess this faculty—requires the subject to get an item down from a high place 
without using a ladder. Deprived of the obvious solution, he must ﬁ nd some other 
approach, such as putting a chair on top of a table, climbing up on the table, and 
then climbing up on the chair. Because chairs do not ordinarily belong on tables, 
and neither chairs nor tables are intended for climbing, the test requires the subject 
to transcend his everyday understanding of the functions of objects.
Lateral thinking puzzles often require the player to use extrinsic knowledge gained 
in real life, but to use it in unexpected ways. In Escape from Monkey Island, the 
player has to put a deﬂ ated inner tube onto a strange-looking cactus to make a 
giant slingshot (or catapult), which requires knowing that inner tubes are stretchy. 
Adventure games frequently include lateral thinking puzzles. You must be careful 
not to make the solution too obscure or to rely on information that goes beyond 
common knowledge; you can expect the average adult player to know that wood 
ﬂ oats, but you cannot expect the player to know that cork comes from the bark of 
certain species of Mediterranean oak tree (that challenge belongs in a trivia game). 
Provide hints or clues to help a player who gets stuck. In general, the more realistic 
the game, the more it may rely on extrinsic knowledge because players know that 
they can count on their real-world experience as being meaningful in the game 
world. In a highly abstract or highly surreal game, the player won’t expect com-
mon-sense experience to be of any use. Such games may still include lateral 
thinking puzzles, but you must provide the knowledge the player needs to solve 
them within the game.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

276 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Actions
As Chapter 8, “User Interfaces,” explains, the user interface links the input devices 
in the real world to actions that take place in the game world. Actions, in this sense, 
refer to events in the game world directly caused by the user interface interpreting 
a player input. If the player presses a button on a game controller and the user 
interface maps that button to striking a cue ball in a game of pool, striking the cue 
ball constitutes an action. If the cue ball knocks another ball into a pocket, that is 
an event, but not an action; the movement of the other ball is a consequence of the 
player’s action.
Actions are the verbs of the game, and the way in which the player usually thinks 
about his play: “I run, I jump, I punch, I buy, I build.” On arcade machines, each 
input device is usually labeled with a verb: Fire, Boost, and so on. When you deﬁ ne 
the player’s role in the concept stage of game design, you should make a list of 
some of these verbs. If the player’s role is to be a cowboy, what does a cowboy do? 
Don’t think in high-level terms (“protect the cattle”) but in terms of verbs that 
might be assigned to input devices (“spur the horse,” “ﬁ re his gun,” “sell a cow,” 
and so on.) 
NO HIERARCHY OF ACTIONS
Challenges are explained in terms of a hierarchy because that hierarchy remains in the 
player’s mind throughout the game, a collection of goals that she works to achieve. You 
might think, then, that there should be an equivalent hierarchy of actions—that if the 
game presents the high-level challenge “try to defeat the boss monster,” there should be 
a high-level action called “defeat the boss monster.”
Actions aren’t in a hierarchy because a hierarchy of actions doesn’t beneﬁ t either you or 
the player. Making up an artiﬁ cial high-level action (defeat the boss monster) to go with 
a high-level challenge isn’t terribly useful. If you tell the player, “To defeat the boss mon-
ster, perform the defeat the boss monster action,” she hasn’t learned anything. There’s 
no such button on the controller, so what good does it do her?
Instead, actions are deﬁ ned in low-level terms, as events resulting directly from the play-
er’s use of the control devices. In fact, a game’s tutorial levels often teach players how to 
defeat monsters not in terms of game actions but in terms of real-world button-presses. 
Tutorials say, “Attack monsters using your punch, kick, and throw shuriken buttons.” It’s 
up to the player to ﬁ gure out how to combine these to defeat the boss monster.
Actions for Gameplay
Most of the actions that a player takes in a game are intended to meet the chal-
lenges that she faces. This book cannot possibly provide a list of all the kinds of 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
277
 CHAPTER 9
gameplay-related actions that players can perform in game worlds; they vary from 
the simple and concrete, such as ﬁ re weapon, to those as complex and abstract as 
send covert operatives to arouse antigovernment sentiment in a hostile nation—which the 
player could do in Balance of Power by choosing a single item on a menu. Study 
other games in the genre you have chosen to see what actions they support.
The interaction model that you have chosen for a particular gameplay mode
determines a lot about the kinds of actions available in that mode. If you use an 
avatar-based interaction model, then the actions available to the player, for the 
most part, consist of inﬂ uencing the game world through the avatar. In games 
using a multipresent model, the player acts indirectly by issuing commands to 
units, which themselves act within the game world (as in real-time strategy games), 
or acts directly on features of the world itself (as in construction and management 
simulations and god games).
Don’t expect a one-to-one mapping between actions and challenges; many games 
include a large number of types of challenges but only a small number of actions, 
leaving the player to ﬁ gure out how to use the actions in various combinations to 
surmount each challenge. Puzzles frequently do this. Faced with a scrambled 
Rubik’s Cube, the player can take only one action: She can rotate one face of the 
cube 90 degrees. The solution to the puzzle consists entirely of making similar 
rotations.
Games offer many challenges but limited numbers of actions for two reasons. First, 
if you give the player a large number of actions to choose from, you must also pro-
vide a large user interface, which can be confusing to the player and increase the 
difﬁ culty of learning the game. (If you implement a context-sensitive interface that 
chooses the correct action for the user based on context, you don’t give the player 
the freedom to try interesting combinations.) Second, a large number of actions 
usually requires a large number of animations to display them all. This makes the 
game expensive to develop.
Many great games implement only a small number of actions but still let the player 
use them to overcome a wide variety of challenges. If you are imaginative enough, 
the challenges will be so interesting that the player will never notice.
DEFINING YOUR ACTIONS
To deﬁ ne the actions that you’ll implement, begin by thinking about the player’s 
role in the game. At the concept stage of your project, you asked, “What is the 
player going to do?” You should have some general answers to that question. Now 
it’s time to go into detail for each gameplay mode. Begin with the primary mode.
If you wrote, “In the primary gameplay mode, the player will drive a car,” think 
about exactly what actions driving entails. Pressing the accelerator, turning the 
steering wheel, and braking, of course, but what else? Shifting the gears? Turning 
on the lights? Using the handbrake? Some of the actions you decide on may have 
to do with challenges; others will simply be another part of the role.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

278 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Next, look at the challenges you designed for the primary gameplay mode. Begin 
with the atomic challenges you plan to offer; for each atomic challenge, write down 
how you expect the player to overcome it. Your answers will probably consist of 
individual actions or small combinations of actions. Ben Cousins has argued that 
game designers should spend most of their effort deﬁ ning and reﬁ ning the way 
that actions overcome atomic challenges because the player spends most of his 
time performing those actions (Cousins, 2004); this is excellent advice.
After you deﬁ ne the actions that will meet the atomic challenges, consider the 
intermediate and higher-level challenges in the gameplay mode. Can they all be 
met with the actions you’ve deﬁ ned, or will they require additional ones? Add 
those to the list.
Finally, consider actions unrelated to gameplay that you may want to make avail-
able to the player. You may already have some that come with the player’s role, but 
you may want to include others for other reasons. See the list in the next section 
for some ideas.
Once you have been through this process for the primary gameplay mode, do it all 
again for each of the other modes. When you believe you have comprehensive lists 
of all the actions that you want to include in each mode, you’re ready to start deﬁ n-
ing the user interfaces for the different modes: assigning actions to control 
mechanisms. (See Chapter 8.)
Actions That Serve Other Functions
Games include many actions that allow the player to interact with the game world 
but not engage in gameplay. Games also offer actions that aren’t speciﬁ cally play 
activities but give the player control over various aspects of the game. The follow-
ing list describes a number of types of non–challenge-related actions.
■ Unstructured play. You will almost certainly want to include some fun-to-
perform actions that don’t address any challenge. Players often move their avatars 
around the game world for the sheer fun of movement or to see a new area even if 
it offers no challenges; this is referred to as sightseeing. You may want to include 
actions just because they’re part of the role. In most driving games, honking the 
horn accomplishes nothing, but if you couldn’t honk the horn, the game would 
feel incomplete.
■ Actions for creation and self-expression. See Chapter 5, “Creative and 
Expressive Play,” for a discussion of actions allowing players to create and custom-
ize things, including avatars. Much of the activity in construction and management
simulations consists of creative play rather than gameplay, although the player’s 
actions are often constrained by limitations imposed by the game’s internal 
economy.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
279
 CHAPTER 9
■ Actions for socialization. Players in multiplayer games, especially online 
games, need ways to talk to each other, to form groups, to compare scores, and
to take part in other community activities. (See Chapter 21, “Online Games.”)
■ Actions to participate in the story. Participating in interactive dialog, interact-
ing with NPCs, or making decisions that affect the plot all constitute actions that 
allow the player to participate in a story even if those actions don’t directly address 
a challenge. The more of them you offer, the more your player feels she is taking 
part in a story.
■ Actions to control the game software. The player takes many actions to con-
trol the game software, such as adjusting the virtual camera, pausing and saving 
the game, choosing a difﬁ culty level, and setting the audio volume. Some such 
actions may affect the game’s challenges (setting the difﬁ culty level certainly 
does), but the player doesn’t take them speciﬁ cally to address a challenge.
Saving the Game
Saving a game takes a snapshot of a game world and all its particulars at a given 
instant and stores them away so that the player can later load the same data, return 
to that instant, and play the game from that point. Saving and restoring a game is 
technologically easy, and it’s essential for testing and debugging, so it’s often 
slapped in as a feature without much thought about its effect on gameplay. As 
designers, though, it’s our job to think about anything that affects gameplay or the 
player’s experience of the game.
Saving a game stores not only the player’s location in the game but also any cus-
tomizations she might have made along the way. In Michelle Kwan Figure Skating, for 
example, the player could customize the body type, skin tone, hair color and style, 
and costume of the skater. The player could even load in a picture of her own face. 
The more freedom you give the player to customize the game or the avatar, the 
more data must be saved. Until recently, this limited the richness of games for con-
sole machines, but now console machines routinely come with enough storage to 
save a lot of customization data.
Reasons for Saving a Game
Reasons for saving a player’s game or allowing him to save it include these:
■ Allowing the player to leave the game and return to it later. This is the most 
important reason for saving the game. In a large game, it’s an essential feature. It’s 
not realistic and not fair to the player to expect him to dedicate the computer or 
console machine to a 40-hour game from start to ﬁ nish with no break.
■ Letting the player recover from disastrous mistakes. In practice, this usually 
means the death of the avatar. Arcade games, which offer no save-game feature, 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

280 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
traditionally give the player a number of lives and chances to earn more along the 
way. Until recently, console action games have tended to follow the same scheme. 
Richer games, such as role-playing or adventure games, usually give the player only 
one life but allow him to reload a saved game if his avatar dies or he realizes that he 
cannot possibly win the current game.
■ Encouraging the player to explore alternate strategies. In turn-based strategic 
games, saving the game allows the player to learn the game by trying alternative 
approaches. If one approach doesn’t seem to work, he can go back to the point at 
which he committed himself and try another approach.
Consequences for Immersion and Storytelling
Saving a game is not always beneﬁ cial to the player’s experience. The act of saving 
a game takes place outside the game world and, as a consequence, saving harms the 
player’s immersion. If a game tries to create the illusion that the player inhabits a 
fantasy world, the act of saving destroys the illusion. One of the most signiﬁ cant 
characteristics of real life is that you cannot return to the past to correct your 
errors; the moment you allow a player to repeat the past, you acknowledge the 
unreality of the game world.
The essence of a story is dramatic tension, and dramatic tension requires that some-
thing be at stake. Reloading a game with a branching storyline affects the player’s 
experience of the story because if he can alter the future by returning to the past 
and making a different decision, nothing really hangs in the balance. Real-world 
decisions bring permanent consequences; you can modify some in the future, but 
the original decision cannot be unmade. But when a player follows ﬁ rst one branch 
of a branching storyline and then goes back in time and follows another branch, he 
experiences the story in an unnatural way. The consequences of his actions lose 
their meaning, and his sense of dramatic tension is either reduced or destroyed 
completely. What is a beneﬁ t to strategic games—the chance to try alternate strate-
gies—presents problems for storytelling.
Nevertheless, the arguments for saving outweigh these disadvantages. If the player 
destroys his immersion by repeatedly reloading the game, that is his choice and not 
the fault of the game designer or the story. As Chapter 7, “Storytelling and Narrative,”
pointed out, a weakness of branching storylines is that they require the player to 
play the game again if he wants to see plot lines that he missed on his ﬁ rst play-
through. Allowing the player to save and reload makes that easier for him. He may 
always choose not to reload if he doesn’t want to.
Ways of Saving a Game
Over the years, designers have devised a variety of different ways to save a game, 
each with its own pros and cons for immersion and gameplay.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAMEPLAY 
281
 CHAPTER 9
PASSWORDS
If your game runs on a device with no storage at all (a rarity nowadays), you can’t 
save the game in the middle of a level, but you can let the player restart the last 
level attempted. Each time the player completes a level, give her a unique password 
that unlocks the next level. At start-up, ask if she wants to enter a password, and if 
she does so correctly, load the level unlocked by that password. She can go directly 
to that level without having to replay all the earlier ones. This method also allows 
her to go back and replay any completed level if she wants to.
SAVE TO A FILE OR SAVE SLOT
The player may interrupt play and save the current state of the game either to a ﬁ le 
on the hard drive or, more usually, to one of a series of named save slots managed 
by the game program. When the player wants to begin the saved game, he tells the 
program to load it from the directory of ﬁ les or slots. This allows the player to keep 
several different copies, saved at different points, and to name them so that he can 
remember which one is which.
Unfortunately, although this is the most common way of saving, it’s also the 
method most harmful to the game’s immersiveness. The user interface for
managing the ﬁ les or save slots necessarily looks like an operating system’s ﬁ le-
management tool, not like a part of the fantasy world that the game depicts. You 
can harmonize this procedure better with appropriate graphics, but saving almost 
always takes the player out of the game world. Some games salvage the immersion 
to some degree by calling the ﬁ le system the player’s journal and making it look as 
if the saved games are kept in a book.
QUICK-SAVE
Fast-moving games in which the player’s avatar stays in more or less constant dan-
ger (such as ﬁ rst-person shooters) frequently offer a quick-save feature. The player 
presses a single button to save the game instantly at any time, without ever leaving 
the game world. The screen displays the words Quick saved for a moment, but other-
wise the player’s immersion in the world remains undisturbed. The player can 
reload the game just as swiftly by pressing a quick-load button. The game returns 
immediately to its state at the last quick-save, without going out of the game world 
to a ﬁ le-management screen.
Disadvantages of quick-save arise because saving so quickly usually means the 
player doesn’t want to take the time, and isn’t offered the chance, to designate a ﬁ le 
or slot. Such games normally offer only one slot, although some let players desig-
nate a numbered slot by entering a digit after they press the quick-save button. 
Players remember which slot is which when quick-loading. Quick-save sacriﬁ ces 
ﬂ exibility to retain immersion and speed.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

282
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
AUTOMATIC SAVE AND CHECKPOINTS
A few games automatically save the state of the game when the player exits, so play-
ers can leave and return at any time without explicitly saving. This harms the 
player’s immersion least of all, but if the player has recently experienced a disaster, 
he has no way to recover from it. More often, games save whenever the player 
passes a checkpoint, which may or may not be visible to him. Checkpoint saving is 
less disruptive than quick-saving because the player never has to do anything. The 
player can go back and undo a disaster, provided that the disaster happened after 
the most recent checkpoint. But it means that the player can’t choose to save when-
ever he wants or choose to restart at some earlier point. If the checkpoints occur 
infrequently, he might lose a great deal of progress in the event of a disaster. 
Although it’s better for immersion from the player-centric standpoint, automatic 
checkpoint saving is inferior to quick-saving. With quick-save, the player always 
has the option not to save if for some reason he enjoys the risk of having to go back 
a long way. With automatic checkpoints, he has no choice.
A few games offer optional checkpoint saving in which the player may choose to 
save or not every time he reaches a checkpoint. This gives him a little more control 
but still doesn’t allow him to save at will, which is preferable.
To Save or Not to Save
A few designers don’t allow players to save their games within certain regions of 
the game or even to save at all. If the player can save and reload where he wants 
and without limit, he can solve puzzles or overcome other obstacles by trial and 
error rather than by skill, or he can use the saving system to avoid undesirable ran-
dom events; if something bad happens by chance, the player can reload the game 
repeatedly until the undesirable event doesn’t occur. This reduces the game’s difﬁ -
culty, and some designers argue against allowing players to save on that basis.
That, however, is lazy game design. Preventing the player from saving adds difﬁ -
culty without adding fun. If you really want to make the game harder, devise 
harder challenges. Forcing the player to replay an entire level because he made a 
mistake near the end wastes his time and condemns him to frustration and bore-
dom—and that certainly is not player-centric game design.
You may not like it if a player repeatedly reloads a game to avoid a random event or 
to solve some problem by trial and error rather than skill, but the player doesn’t 
play (or buy) the game to make you feel good. He might need to save the game for 
perfectly legitimate reasons. The notion that saving makes a game too easy assumes 
that the player is your opponent, a violation of the player-centric principle. Most 
games now recognize that players want—and sometimes need—to cheat by offering 
cheat codes anyway.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

