GAMEPLAY 
285
 CHAPTER 9
Design Practice QUESTIONS
1. What types of challenges do you want to include in your game? Do you want to 
challenge the player’s physical abilities, his mental abilities, or both?
2. Game genres are deﬁ ned in part by the nature of the challenges they offer. What 
does your choice of genre imply for the gameplay? Do you intend to include any 
cross-genre elements, challenges that are not normally found in your chosen genre?
3. What is your game’s hierarchy of challenges? How many levels do you expect it 
to have? What challenges are typical of each level?
4. What are your game’s atomic challenges? Do you plan to make the player face 
more than one atomic challenge at a time? Are they all independent, like battling 
enemies one at a time, or are they interrelated, like balancing an economy? If they 
are interrelated, how?
5. Does the player have a choice of approaches to victory? Can he decide on one 
strategy over another? Can he ignore some challenges, face others, and still achieve 
a higher-level goal? Or must he simply face all the game’s challenges in sequence?
6. Does the game include implicit challenges (those that emerge from the design), 
as well as explicit challenges (those that you specify)?
7. Do you intend to offer settable difﬁ culty levels for your game? What levels of 
intrinsic skill and stress will each challenge require?
8. What actions will you implement to meet your challenges? Can the player sur-
mount a large number of challenges with a small number of actions? What is the 
mapping of actions to challenges?
9. What other actions will you implement for other purposes? What are those pur-
poses—unstructured play, creativity and self-expression, socialization, story 
participation, or controlling the game software?
10. What save mechanism do you plan to implement?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Core Mechanics
The core mechanics of a game determine how that game actually operates: what its 
rules are and how the player interacts with them. This chapter begins by deﬁ ning 
the core mechanics and explaining their role in creating the entertainment experi-
ence. You’ll learn how the core mechanics differ between real-time and turn-based 
games and how the core mechanics are related to level design. Next we’ll look at 
some key elements of core mechanics: resources, entities, and mechanics. You’ll 
learn the deﬁ nitions of these terms and how you may use these concepts to specify 
rules precisely.
From the general features of core mechanics, we’ll then turn to their speciﬁ c imple-
mentation in the internal economy of games, a set of mechanics that governs the ﬂ ow 
of quantities. We’ll also look at how designers use mechanics to create gameplay by 
implementing both challenges and actions. Having introduced all these aspects of 
core mechanics, you’ll learn an approach for designing them, which involves reex-
amining early design work and rendering it speciﬁ c and concrete. The chapter 
concludes by brieﬂ y discussing random numbers and how to use them in games.
What Are the Core Mechanics?
Isn’t the greatest rule of all the rules simply to please?
 
 
 
 
—M OLIÈRE
You ﬁ rst read about core mechanics in Chapter 2, “Design Components and 
Processes.” There you learned that the core mechanics are the heart of the game, 
generating the gameplay and implementing the rules. This chapter examines the 
core mechanics in further detail and offers a formal deﬁ nition:
CORE MECHANICS The core mechanics consist of the data and the algorithms that 
precisely deﬁ ne the game’s rules and internal operations.
Turning Rules into Core Mechanics
In the early stages of design, you may have only a hazy idea of the details of your 
game’s rules. Early on, you may say, “Players will be penalized for taking too long 
to get through the swamp.” or “Players will have only a limited time to get through 
the swamp.” But that description does not supply enough information to build a 
game. What is the penalty? How long does the player have? When you design the 
core mechanics, you deﬁ ne the rules precisely and completely. That same rule in 
CHAPTER 10
286


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
287
 CHAPTER 10
the core mechanics might read something like, “When the avatar enters the 
swamp, the black toadstools begin to emit a poison gas that the player can see ﬁ ll-
ing the screen, starting at the bottom and rising at a rate of 1 game-world inch 
every 3 seconds; by the end of 3 minutes, the gas reaches the height of the avatar’s 
face, and if by that time the avatar is still in the swamp, the avatar dies. If the ava-
tar returns to the swamp later, the gas is gone but the process starts over again from 
the beginning.” In this example, the clauses beginning with when and if state algo-
rithms, and 1 game-world inch every 3 seconds and 3 minutes are examples of data 
that also form a part of the rule.
THE RULES AND CORE MECHANICS OF MONOPOLY
The rules of Monopoly, as Parker Brothers ships them with the game, take up less than 
three full pages. However, the rules printed on the paper are not sufﬁ cient to build a 
computer game: They don’t include complete documentation of all the data necessary to 
play. To properly specify the core mechanics of Monopoly, you would have to include not 
only the printed rules but the prices of each of the properties on the board, the different 
amounts of rent that may be collected at each location (including special mechanics for 
the utilities and railroads), the layout of the board, and the effects of all the Chance and 
Community Chest cards. A full speciﬁ cation of the core mechanics of Monopoly is consid-
erably more detailed than the general rules.
Where Are the Core Mechanics?
The core mechanics—the precise deﬁ nition of the rules and internal operations of 
the game—remain the same whether you keep them in your head, write them on 
paper, or implement them in any programming language you like. Although the 
mechanics remain the same, their implementation varies as your project goes through 
the different stages of the design and development process. First you document the 
algorithms in ordinary language in a design document; at this point, if you want to 
change the mechanics, you edit the document. Later you may build a spreadsheet 
containing the algorithms and data and tweak them there. Or you might make a 
paper prototype that allows you to play the game, writing the values of the variables 
on pieces of paper and manipulating them yourself according to the algorithms 
you’ve worked out, to see if the algorithms produce the game experience you want 
to offer. Using what you learn, you may update the design documents or just let the 
spreadsheets become the ofﬁ cial implementation. The core mechanics remain the 
rules of the game; only the implementation has changed.
Eventually the core mechanics, as complete as you can make them, should be so 
precisely stated that the programmers can write code using your core mechanics 
document or your spreadsheet as speciﬁ cations. The algorithms of the core 
mechanics become the algorithms in their code, and the data required by the core 
mechanics reside in ﬁ les so that the game software can read them in as necessary. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

288 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
At this point, if you want to change the mechanics, you ask the programmers to 
change the code or the data ﬁ les. You should in principle also change the design 
documents; in practice, designers seldom do this because the code and ﬁ les have 
become the authorized implementation of the core mechanics. In short, the core 
mechanics are wherever your team considers their ofﬁ cial implementation to be:
in the design documents, the spreadsheets, or in the code and data ﬁ les.
The player does not experience the core mechanics directly. She can’t point to 
something on the screen and say, “Those are the core mechanics.” If you apply 
player-centric design principles, all of the core mechanics work together to provide 
a good game experience even though players don’t know what core mechanics are 
and can only infer the functionality of the core mechanics from the way the game 
behaves.
DESIGN RULE Design the Game, Not the Software
The game engine is the part of the software that implements the game’s rules. While the 
core mechanics spell out the rules of the game in detail, so that in practice they specify 
what the game engine will do, the core mechanics do not dictate exactly how the game 
engine will do it. Don’t worry about deﬁ ning the precise algorithms the programmers 
should use to build the game engine. That decision is theirs to make. In short, if there is 
more than one way to achieve the same effect in the game, let the programmers decide 
which one to use.
You don’t have to know how to program to design the core mechanics, but you 
must be generally familiar with algorithmic processes. The later section “Mechanics”
addresses this in more detail.
The Core Mechanics as Processes
If you get a job in the game industry, you will hear industry professionals talk 
about the core mechanics as if the mechanics actively take part in the game: The 
core mechanics “talk to the storytelling engine” or “signal the UI.” But rules can’t 
act. You would never say of Monopoly that the rules do anything beyond perhaps 
“allowing” the player to take a particular action or “specifying” a penalty. So what’s 
going on?
The relationship between the core mechanics and the game engine is extremely 
close, because the core mechanics specify how it will behave. So references to the 
core mechanics may sound like references to the engine itself. As long as you 
understand that the core mechanics consist of algorithms and data that precisely 
deﬁ ne the rules, it doesn’t really matter. When these algorithms exist only in the 
core mechanics design document, they obviously can’t do anything, but when the 
programmers turn them into code, they can.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
289
 CHAPTER 10
Therefore, when you read, “The core mechanics send triggers to the storytelling 
engine,” it’s just shorthand for a longer sentence that reads, “The game engine, using 
algorithms speciﬁ ed by the core mechanics, sends triggers to the storytelling engine.”
Functions of the Core Mechanics in Operation
During play, the core mechanics (as implemented by the game engine) operate 
behind the scenes to create and manage gameplay for the player, keep track of 
everything that happens in the game world, and work with the storytelling engine 
to help tell the story. The following list details what core mechanics do:
■ Operate the internal economy of the game. The core mechanics specify how 
the game or the player creates, distributes, and uses up the goods on which the 
game bases its economy. This function is the most important role of the core 
mechanics. The later section “The Internal Economy” addresses this in detail.
■ Present active challenges to the player via the user interface, as the level design 
speciﬁ es. Active challenges are those governed by mechanics. Passive challenges, 
such as a chasm that the avatar must jump over, don’t have mechanics of their 
own. The later section “Challenges and the Core Mechanics” discusses the distinc-
tion between active and passive challenges.
■ Accept player actions from the user interface and implement their effects upon 
the game world and other players.
■ Detect victory or loss, and the termination conditions of the game. More gener-
ally, the mechanics detect success or failure in all challenges in the game, and 
apply whatever consequences the rules call for.
■ Operate the artiﬁ cial intelligence of nonplayer characters and artiﬁ cial 
opponents.
■ Switch the game from mode to mode. The core mechanics keep track of the 
current gameplay mode and, whenever a mode change occurs (either because the 
nature of the game requires it or the player requests it), the core mechanics switch 
modes and signal the user interface to update the UI accordingly.
■ Transmit triggers to the storytelling engine when game events or player 
actions that inﬂ uence the plot occur.
Real-Time Games Versus Turn-Based Games
Your speciﬁ cation of the core mechanics will read somewhat differently depending 
on whether your game is turn-based or takes place in real time.
Most video games operate in real time, so the core mechanics specify the parame-
ters of a living world that operates on its own whether the player acts or not. Many 
of the mechanics you design will be processes that operate continuously or for 
extended periods. AI-driven characters go about their business, traps check to see


--- PAGE BREAK ---

290 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
if they should spring upon anyone, banks collect and pay interest, and so on. 
When you specify one-shot events rather than continuous processes, the events
will often occur as a direct or indirect consequence of player actions or because 
some process detects a special condition, such as when a runner crosses the ﬁ nish 
line in a race. (The later section “Mechanics” discusses events and processes in 
greater detail.)
In a turn-based game with no artiﬁ cial opponents, the core mechanics don’t do 
anything at all until a player takes his turn. Once he has done so, the core mechan-
ics can compute the effects of his actions on the game world. Then the mechanics 
remain idle while the next player takes her turn, and so on. In some games, all the 
players enter their intended actions simultaneously while the mechanics remain 
idle; once the players ﬁ nish for that turn, the core mechanics compute the effect of 
all players’ actions.
In a turn-based game, then, your design for the mechanics will read like a speciﬁ ca-
tion for a sequence of events rather than a set of processes that operate all the time. 
You will state the effects of each possible action and what other computations take 
place as a consequence. Although you may design processes for a turn-based game, 
you must realize that processes do not really operate continuously; they only run 
between player turns. Your design for a process in a turn-based game must include 
points at which the process may safely be interrupted for the next player’s turn.
In a turn-based game that does have artiﬁ cial opponents or NPCs, the mechanics 
don’t remain entirely idle between turns because they must compute the behavior 
of these characters. However, the artiﬁ cial characters still act in turns, just as the 
player does.
Core Mechanics and Level Design
Most video games for consoles and personal computers present gameplay in sepa-
rate levels (also called chapters, missions, or scenarios, depending on the genre), 
each with its own set of initial conditions, challenges, and termination conditions. 
Level designers plan, construct, and test these levels, as Chapter 12, “General 
Principles of Level Design,” discusses.
Ordinarily, the level design speciﬁ es the type, timing, and sequence of challenges 
that appear during play, whereas the core mechanics specify how different chal-
lenges actually work. When a level starts up, the core mechanics read the level 
design data from a ﬁ le, which includes: the initial state of the game world for each 
level; the challenges, actions, and NPCs for each level; and the victory conditions 
for the levels (see Figure 10.1). If the game consists of only one level or creates ran-
domized levels, the core mechanics must also include mechanics for setting up the 
level before the game ﬁ rst enters a gameplay mode.
Therefore, your design for the core mechanics should specify how challenges work 
in general but not exactly which challenges each level will contain. As you design 
the core mechanics, concentrate on those features of the game that will be needed 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
291
 CHAPTER 10
in more than one level, and leave special-case features found only in a particular 
level to the level designer. It may be that the level designer can create code for 
those features using a scripting language and won’t have to ask the game’s pro-
grammers to do it.
This doesn’t mean that you can push all the work off onto the level designers, 
though. Think of the features you create in the core mechanics as being like LEGO 
blocks that the level designers will use to build their level. In a war game, the core 
mechanics, not the level designs, deﬁ ne how all the units in the game move and 
ﬁ ght. Once you design all the units, the level designers can use your information 
on how the units operate to construct exciting levels featuring those units.
Key Concepts
To design the core mechanics, you must document the different components that 
deﬁ ne how your game works: resources, entities, attributes, and mechanics. This sec-
tion deﬁ nes these terms. Although you do not have to be a programmer to design a 
game, you wouldn’t be a game designer if you didn’t intend for your ideas to 
FIGURE 10.1
The core mechanics 
read the level design 
data from ﬁ les.
PLAYER
USER INTERFACE
STORYTELLING ENGINE
CORE MECHANICS
Inputs
Outputs
Triggers
Narrative Events
In-Game Events
Player Events
LEVEL 
DESIGN 
DATA


--- PAGE BREAK ---

292 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
eventually turn into computer programs. You will need to have at least a nodding 
acquaintance with how programmers think about data and the relationships 
between different items of data, ideas that crop up in this discussion.
Resources
The term resource refers to types of objects or materials the game can move or 
exchange, which the game handles as numeric quantities, performing arithmetic 
operations on the values. Resource does not refer to speciﬁ c instances of these types 
of objects but the type itself in an abstract sense. Marbles constitute a resource in 
your game if your player can pick up marbles, trade them, and put them down 
again, but the word resource doesn’t describe a speciﬁ c marble in your player’s 
pocket or even a speciﬁ c collection of marbles; it describes marbles generally. 
Marbles are a resource, but the 15 marbles in the player’s pocket are an instance of a 
resource: a particular collection of marbles.
The core mechanics deﬁ ne the processes by which the game creates, uses, trades, 
and destroys resources; that is, the rules by which speciﬁ c instances of resources—
one lump of gold, the marbles in the player’s pocket, the ammo in her inventory, 
the water in her reservoir—can legally be moved from place to place or from owner 
to owner, or can come into or go out of the game. 
A resource may be of a type that can be handled as individual items, such as mar-
bles, or of a type that cannot be divided into individual items, such as water 
(although water may be measured in volumetric units).
Games often treat nonphysical concepts such as popularity or vague concepts such 
as resistance to poison as resources, even though we don’t ordinarily think of these 
as quantities that can be measured and even bought and sold. Part of a game 
designer’s job involves quantifying the unquantiﬁ able—turning such abstract
qualities as charisma or pugnacity into numbers that a program can manipulate.
Entities
An entity is a particular instance of a resource or the state of some element of the 
game world. (A light may be on or off, for instance.) A building, a character, or an 
animal can be an entity, but perhaps less obviously a pile of gold or a vessel of 
water can be an entity. The state of a trafﬁ c light that at any given time might be 
red, green, or yellow can also be an entity.
Be sure you understand the difference between resources and entities. Remember 
that a resource is only a type of thing, not the thing itself. A speciﬁ c airplane is an 
entity, but if your game includes a factory that manufactures airplanes, such that 
management of the supply of airplanes makes up part of the gameplay, then air-
planes, as a commodity, constitute a resource even though each individual airplane 
remains an entity. Earlier, we noted that marbles can be a resource but a marble in 
NOTE Purely cos-
metic items are not a 
resource. If you build 
a level full of ﬂ owers 
but the player can’t 
do anything with 
them and nothing 
ever happens to them, 
then ﬂ owers are not a 
resource. The ﬂ owers 
set the stage and con-
tribute aesthetically, 
but the core mechanics 
will not need to take 
ﬂ owers into account. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
293
 CHAPTER 10
the player’s pocket is not; now we can see that each marble in his pocket is an 
entity. Points in a sports game qualify as a resource, but the team’s score is an 
entity. The score pertains only to that team, recording a number of points scored.
SIMPLE ENTITIES
The player’s score or the current state of a trafﬁ c light can be completely speciﬁ ed 
by a single datum; this is called a simple entity. The single value stored in this 
datum can be numeric, such as a score, or symbolic, such as the possible states of a 
trafﬁ c light: red, green, or yellow. The later section “Numeric and Symbolic 
Relationships” discusses the differences between numeric and symbolic values.
Once you decide to add a symbolic entity, such as a trafﬁ c light, to the game world, 
you will need to deﬁ ne it in the core mechanics as a simple entity, specifying its 
initial state and providing a list of all its possible states. For a numeric entity, you’ll 
need to deﬁ ne an initial quantity and the range of possible legal values. In the tun-
ing stage of design, you will spend a great deal of time adjusting these values, so 
don’t worry too much about getting them exactly right at ﬁ rst.
COMPOUND ENTITIES
It may take more than one data value to describe an entity. In a ﬂ ying game, in 
which characterizing the wind requires stating both its speed and its direction, the 
wind is a compound entity. Each of these values is called an attribute.
An attribute is an entity that belongs to, and therefore helps to describe, another 
entity. To describe the wind, you need to know the values of its speed attribute and 
its direction attribute. You can specify the wind’s speed with a numeric value and 
its direction with a symbolic value (one of a set that includes northwesterly, westerly,
southwesterly, and so on). In this case, each attribute of our overall entity (the wind) 
is itself a simple entity, but this is not always, and not even usually, the case. 
Attributes may themselves be compound entities. In a sports game, a team has 
attributes such as its name, hometown, and statistics, as well as its collection of 
athletes, each of whom is an entity with his own attributes such as speed and agil-
ity. In a driving game, the car the player drives is a compound entity with 
attributes that describe its performance characteristics. In a business simulation, 
factories are compound entities with attributes for rates of production, stock on 
hand, and so forth. Most of the entities you will deﬁ ne for any game, other than 
the most elementary of games, will be compound entities. Figure 10.2 shows an 
example of three types of entities: one simple, one compound containing only sim-
ple attributes, and one compound containing both simple attributes and another 
compound entity. The gray boxes are only labels to aid understanding; their con-
tents are not stored as data.
Both Chapter 5, “Creative and Expressive Play,” and Chapter 6, “Character 
Development,” discuss attributes at some length, so that information is not 
repeated here. Be aware, however, that you don’t use attributes only for characters. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

294 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Any entity in the game may have attributes that describe it: Vehicles have perfor-
mance characteristics, factories have production rates, and so on.
As with any simple entity, you should choose an initial quantity or state for an 
attribute when you decide to include the attribute in your game.
Points Scored
1,755,245
Northwest
Voldarok
25
117
Elf
Feasting Hall
5
Sword
Shield
Food
Helmet
Armor
35
Wind
Speed
Name
Money
Health
Race
Location
# Items
Item 1
Item 2
Item 3
Item 4
Item 5
Direction
Inventory
Avatar
IF YOU HAPPEN TO BE A PROGRAMMER… 
If you are a programmer, you may have noticed that entities sound a lot like objects in
object-oriented programming: They include variables for storing numeric and symbolic 
values and may be made up of other entities in the same way that programming objects 
may be made up of other objects. And like classes of objects in programming, entities 
have associated mechanics (though programmers would call them functions or methods)
for manipulating these data.
For most practical purposes, you can treat entities and programming objects as identical, 
and if you happen to program as well as design your game, you will certainly implement 
entities as objects in your code. This book uses the term entity rather than object
because we normally use object in the everyday sense to refer to some physical item in 
the game world.
UNIQUE ENTITIES
If your game contains only one entity of a particular type, then that is a unique 
entity. In most adventure games, the objects that the avatar can pick up are unique 
entities. The avatar itself in most games is a unique entity because there is usually 
FIGURE 10.2
Examples of three 
different entities
A Simple 
Numeric Entity
A Compound Entity 
with Two Attributes
A Compound Entity Containing Another 
Compound Entity as an Attribute


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
295
 CHAPTER 10
only one avatar. In a football game, the football is a unique entity, because there 
may never be two footballs in play at any one time.
Note that the airplanes mentioned in the previous section are not unique entities 
even if each carries its own serial number and particular state of repair. They still 
may be treated collectively, bought and sold in groups, and when treated as a group 
considered to be a resource.
DEFINING ENTITIES FOR YOUR GAME
As you specify your core mechanics, you will need to create entities for any charac-
ter, object, or substance that the game needs to manipulate and for any value that 
the game needs to remember. In the case of items such as footballs, vehicles, 
money, and health, determining what attributes each entity requires will probably 
seem obvious—although deﬁ ning their mechanics won’t always be simple. You 
may also need to create entities that hold quantities or other information that the 
user interface will display. Every indicator in the user interface needs an entity that 
reﬂ ects the indicator’s state or appearance.
Suppose you want to warn the player when a valuable resource, such as fuel in a 
car’s gas tank, reaches critically low levels. You would normally put a needle gauge 
in the user interface to show the fuel level, and you may want to add a warning 
light to draw the player’s attention to the gauge. The light can be either on or off. 
To support the light, you need to deﬁ ne an entity called fuel warning that can exist 
in two states. During play, the user interface checks the state of the fuel warning 
entity to display the appropriate image of the light. You also need to create a 
mechanic (discussed in the next section “Mechanics”) to deﬁ ne precisely what con-
ditions change the state of the fuel warning entity.
You may wonder why you should create an additional entity and mechanic for the 
state of the warning light rather than have the user interface software check the 
fuel level and decide for itself whether to turn on the warning light. Professionals 
keep the mechanics in one part of the design and the UI in another. That way, the 
UI designer doesn’t have to worry about underlying mechanics; she can concen-
trate on screen layouts and usability considerations, and if you want to adjust the 
point at which the light comes on during the tuning stage of design, you can do so 
without interfering with the user interface itself.
Mechanics
Mechanics document how the game world and everything in it behave. Mechanics 
state the relationships among entities, the events and processes that take place 
among the resources and entities of the game, and the conditions that trigger 
events and processes. The mechanics describe the overall rules of the game but also 
the behavior of particular entities, from something as simple as a light switch up to 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

296 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
the AI of a very smart NPC. The earlier section “Functions of the Core Mechanics 
in Operation” gave a list of the kinds of things mechanics do in a game.
Some mechanics operate throughout the game, while others apply only in particu-
lar gameplay modes and not in others. A mechanic that operates throughout the 
game is called a global mechanic. Any game with more than one gameplay mode 
needs at least one global mechanic that governs when the game changes from 
mode to mode, and an entity that records what mode it is in.
RELATIONSHIPS AMONG ENTITIES
If the value of one entity depends upon the value or state of one or more other enti-
ties, you need to specify the relationship between the entities involved. In the case 
of numeric entities, you express the relationship mathematically. Many role-playing
games, for example, deﬁ ne character levels in terms of experience points earned; when
a character earns a certain amount of experience, his level goes up. The formula may
be given by a simple equation, such as character level = experience points × 1,000,
or a more complicated equation, or it may require looking the value up in a table.
If the nature of this relationship remains constant throughout the game, you need 
not worry about specifying when it should actually be computed; let the program-
mers decide that. Just specify the relationship itself.
EVENTS AND PROCESSES
When you describe an event or a process, you state that something happens:
A change occurs among, or to, the entities speciﬁ ed in the mechanics.
An event is a speciﬁ c change that happens once when triggered by a condition
(deﬁ ned in the next section) and doesn’t happen again until triggered again. 
“When the player picks up a golden egg” speciﬁ es a trigger condition, and “he
gets two points” deﬁ nes an event.
A process refers to a sequence of activities that, once initiated, continues until 
stopped. A player action or other game event starts a process that runs until some-
thing stops it.
Both events and processes may consist of whole sequences of actions that the com-
puter must take. When you document such a sequence, be clear about the order in 
which things should happen. Part of the sequence getting dressed might be, “First 
put on socks, then put on shoes.” If you leave the language ambiguous and the pro-
grammer misinterprets your meaning, you will introduce a bug into the game.
NOTE Designing 
the core mechanics 
requires the greatest 
clarity and precision of 
language. Ambiguous 
mechanics turn into 
buggy code. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
297
 CHAPTER 10
ANALYZING A MECHANIC
Let’s go back to the sample mechanic that Chapter 2 introduced in the sidebar “Game 
Idea Versus Design Decision” and identify its various components. To specify the idea 
“Dragons should protect their eggs,” we create a mechanic that reads: “Whenever they 
have eggs in their nests, female dragons do not move out of visual range of the nest. 
If an enemy approaches within 50 meters of the nest, the dragon abandons any other 
activity and returns to the nest to defend the eggs. She does not leave the nest until no 
enemy has been within the 50-meter radius for at least 30 seconds. She defends the eggs 
to her death.”
This mechanic makes up one small part of the speciﬁ cation of a female dragon’s artiﬁ cial 
intelligence. It applies to all female dragons at any time, so it belongs in the core 
mechanics, not in the design of a level. (However, if dragons appear in only one level, 
this mechanic should be part of that level’s design, and if the dragon is a unique entity, 
you should specify the mechanics relating to its behavior wherever you deﬁ ne what a 
dragon is, and nowhere else.)
Here’s how this mechanic looks with the components identiﬁ ed:
“Whenever they have eggs in their nests (a condition about a relationship between a 
resource, eggs, and an entity, the nest, such that eggs in nest > 0), female dragons (each 
one an entity) do not move (a process) out of visual range of the nest (a condition placed 
on the movement process). If an enemy (an entity) comes within 50 meters of the nest (a 
condition), the dragon abandons any other activity (end her current process) and returns 
to the nest (a process) to defend the eggs (a process). She does not leave the nest (initiate 
a process) until no enemy has been within the 50-meter radius for at least 30 seconds (a 
complicated condition that prevents her from initiating the process of leaving the nest). 
She defends the eggs to her death (a condition indicating that the dragon does not initi-
ate any other process while defending the eggs, such as running away).”
Even this, complex as it is, isn’t complete. It doesn’t say whether or not eggs can be 
destroyed or removed from the nest and, if so, what the dragon does about it. It doesn’t 
state how visual range should be computed, how the dragon goes about returning to her 
nest, or what defending the eggs actually consists of. It also includes a negative condi-
tion (“she does not leave the nest until . . . ”) without a general rule stating when she 
does leave the nest in the ﬁ rst place. All that information must be included elsewhere in 
the deﬁ nition of the dragon’s AI and the deﬁ nition of a nest and an egg. If you don’t 
deﬁ ne these things speciﬁ cally, the programmers will either come and ask you to, or they 
will make a guess for themselves.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

298 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
CONDITIONS
Use conditions to deﬁ ne what causes an event to occur and what causes a process to 
start or stop. Conditional statements often take the form if (condition) then (execute 
an event, or start or stop a process); whenever (condition) take action to (execute an 
event, or start or stop a process); and continue (a process) until (condition). 
Mechanics deﬁ ning victory and loss conditions conform to this style.
You can also deﬁ ne conditions in negative terms, such as if (condition) then do not
(execute an event, or start or stop a process), although a condition in this form is 
incomplete. “If the mouse is wearing its cat disguise, the cat won’t attack it,” doesn’t 
provide enough information because it doesn’t tell the programmers when the cat 
does attack the mouse. Use this form of conditional mechanic for indicating excep-
tions to more general rules already speciﬁ ed: “When a cat sees a mouse, the cat will 
attack it. But if the mouse is wearing its cat disguise, the cat won’t attack it.”
ENTITIES WITH THEIR OWN MECHANICS
Some mechanics deﬁ ne the behavior of only one type of entity and nothing else in 
the game, in which case you should ﬁ gure out the details and document the entity 
and its associated exclusive mechanics together. This makes it easier for the pro-
grammers to build the game and for you to ﬁ nd the documentation if you need to 
change something. This is very like object-oriented programming. In object-ori-
ented programming, you think about the variables and the algorithms that 
manipulate them together as a unit. 
Examples of entities with their own mechanics include symbolic entities that 
require special mechanics to indicate how they change state (such as a trafﬁ c light); 
numeric entities whose values are computed from other entities by a formula (such 
as the amount of damage done in an attack under Dungeons & Dragons rules—it is 
computed from several other factors, some of them random); nonplayer characters 
with AI-controlled behavior (the deﬁ nition of the artiﬁ cial intelligence consists of 
mechanics); and entities that act autonomously even if their behavior doesn’t really 
qualify as artiﬁ cial intelligence, such as a trap that triggers whenever a character 
comes near. In the case of a triggered trap, you deﬁ ne its various attributes, both 
functional and cosmetic, and a set of mechanics that indicate exactly what sets it 
off and what kind of damage it does to the character who triggers it.
Numeric and Symbolic Relationships
This section discusses the differences between the numeric and symbolic relationships 
and how you may combine them to achieve your design goals for the core mechanics.
NUMERIC RELATIONSHIPS
Numeric relationship means a relationship between entities deﬁ ned in terms of num-
bers and arithmetic operations. For example, the statement “A bakery can bake 50 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
299
 CHAPTER 10
loaves of bread from one sack of ﬂ our and four buckets of water” speciﬁ es a 
numeric relationship between water, ﬂ our, and bread. Here is another example: 
“The probability of an injury occurring to an athlete in a collision with another 
athlete is proportional to the weight difference between the two athletes and their 
relative speeds at the time of the collision.” Although this second example leaves 
the precise details up to the programmer to decide, it does specify a numeric rela-
tionship: Weights and speeds, both numeric attributes of the athletes, go into 
computing the probability of an injury, a numeric entity. (Remember that an attri-
bute is just an entity that belongs to another entity.)
Deﬁ ning numeric relationships precisely requires some familiarity with algebra and 
arithmetic. First, you must ensure that you use meaningful equations; if you write 
that the speed the convoy will travel is in part a function of the quantity deﬁ ned by 
(the weight of supplies) ÷ (number of pack horses – number of camp followers),
you may very well end up with a divide-by-zero error. Because the resulting value 
interacts with other parts of the mechanics, changes in the way you calculate that 
value will have a domino effect, ultimately inﬂ uencing the gameplay itself, and 
you must be able to understand and predict these effects. Chris Crawford’s Balance 
of Power: International Politics as the Ultimate Global Game (Crawford, 1986) remains 
one of the best books ever written on numeric relationships in the core mechanics. 
Although it is out of print, used copies are still available from online bookstores. 
The text is also available in ASCII form at www.erasmatazz.com/library/
Balance%20of%20Power.txt. 
Numeric relationships lie at the heart of internal economies, and the later section 
“The Internal Economy” discusses them further.
SYMBOLIC RELATIONSHIPS
The values of symbolic entities—red, on, empty, found, and the like—cannot be 
added together or otherwise manipulated mathematically. You must specify all the 
states that a symbolic entity may represent, and the relationships among them, 
without equations. For instance, the red, yellow, and green states of a trafﬁ c light 
are not related to each other numerically; they’re simply different. To use a trafﬁ c 
light, you must document how it gets into each of its possible states and how the 
light in each of those states affects the behavior of other entities. To deﬁ ne the 
behavior of an NPC driver who sees a trafﬁ c light, you would write three separate 
mechanics into his AI, one for each state of the light, to say how the driver reacts to 
seeing a red light, a yellow light, or a green light. When any entity in the game 
(such as a driver) interacts with a symbolic entity (such as a trafﬁ c light), you must 
state exactly what happens for each possible symbolic state of the entity. If you 
leave one state out, no interaction will occur with that state.
A binary (two-state) entity is sometimes called a ﬂ ag. You will often create ﬂ ags in 
your game to document whether the avatar has entered locations, overcome spe-
ciﬁ c obstacles, and so on.
TIP The values of 
numeric entities may 
change according to 
arithmetic processes, 
but you must create 
mechanics that explic-
itly change symbolic 
entities from state 
to state. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

300 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
This chapter doesn’t discuss symbolic relationships much further because they are 
relatively easy to deﬁ ne and their results are easier to predict; numeric relationships 
are harder to create and tune. Although it is possible to create extremely compli-
cated symbolic relationships (think about Rubik’s Cube), most of the symbolic 
relationships in games tend to be rather simple.
INTEGRATING SYMBOLIC AND NUMERIC RELATIONSHIPS 
Although you cannot perform arithmetic operations on symbolic values, you can 
deﬁ ne how symbolic entities change from state to state in terms of other numeric 
data. If the symbolic entity fuel warning can take the values on and off, you can 
deﬁ ne a mechanic for each of the states based on the quantity of fuel available: 
“When the amount of fuel goes below 2 gallons, the fuel warning value switches to 
on. When the amount of fuel rises to 2 gallons or more, the fuel warning value 
switches to off.”
A symbolic entity can contribute to a mathematical function if you have a 
mechanic that associates a symbolic entity into number. For example, the state of
a car’s transmission is symbolic; the transmission is either in one gear or another, 
and you can’t add gears together. But you can make a table that shows the gear ratio 
of each gear, and use the results to make computations about the speed of the 
driveshafts. For example you can specify, “In ﬁ rst gear, the ratio is 3.83 to 1. In sec-
ond gear, the ratio is 2.01 to 1. In third gear, the ratio is 1.46 to 1. In reverse gear, 
the ratio is 4 to -1. The negative value causes the driveshaft to turn backwards.” 
This mechanic converts a symbolic entity (transmission state) into a numeric entity 
(gear ratio).
The Internal Economy
An economy is a system in which resources and entities are produced, consumed, 
and exchanged in quantiﬁ able amounts. Most games have an internal economy, 
though the complexity and importance of the internal economy varies consider-
ably from genre to genre. Chapter 18, “Construction and Management Simulations,”
provides more discussion of internal economies.
A game designer spends part of her time designing and tuning her game’s econ-
omy, and the more complex the economy, the more time she needs to spend. This 
section introduces aspects of an internal economy, which it explains by reference 
to both a simple action game (a shooter) and a complex game (a construction and 
management simulation).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
301
 CHAPTER 10
MECHANICS OUTSIDE THE INTERNAL ECONOMY
The internal economy of a game includes those resources and mechanics that the player 
knows about and tries to manipulate. These include data that may be displayed by the 
user interface or that form part of the victory and loss conditions. Designers generally 
do not consider those mechanics over which the player does not exert control to be part 
of the internal economy. The mechanics that deﬁ ne the AI of nonplayer characters, for 
example, make up part of the core mechanics but not part of the internal economy of 
the game.
A mechanic governing avatar and vehicle movement may or may not be considered part 
of the internal economy, depending on whether movement produces or consumes any 
resource. A serious car racing simulation treats fuel as a resource that the engine con-
verts to kinetic energy (another resource) as the engine drives the car forward. The 
brakes consume kinetic energy, slowing the car down, and this wears out the brakes. 
Only the most realistic racing games bother to simulate fuel consumption, kinetic energy, 
or brake wear, and in those games, such factors can legitimately be considered part of 
the internal economy. Less sophisticated vehicle simulations make the vehicle stop and 
go at the player’s command without incorporating any concept of resource production or 
consumption. Similarly, in most games featuring a humanoid avatar, the avatar can walk, 
climb, jump, and ﬁ ght indeﬁ nitely without ever needing food; these processes do not 
consume anything. For the most part, then, the mechanics of movement don’t form part 
of a game’s internal economy unless the physics simulation is sophisticated enough to 
justify its inclusion.
Sources
If a resource or entity can come into the game world having not been there before, 
the mechanic by which it arrives is called a source.
In a simple shooter, the game begins with some resources, such as enemies, already 
in the game world, but more enemies may appear at spawn points. A spawn point is 
a designated location where the core mechanics insert new resources into the game 
world and therefore into the economy. Enemies are part of the economy, a resource 
that is produced at spawn points and consumed by conﬂ ict with the avatar. Each 
spawn point is governed by a mechanic that speciﬁ es its location, what kind of 
resource it generates (spawn points in shooters can also produce weapons, ammuni-
tion, or health packs), and at what frequency. 
Sources often produce resources automatically (or at least produce resources auto-
matically once the player starts them going, for example, by building a factory). 
You will need to deﬁ ne a production rate, either ﬁ xed or variable, and different 
sources may produce the same resource at different rates. In The Settlers games, riv-
ers produce ﬁ sh at a constant rate. A mechanic also deﬁ nes the maximum number 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

302 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
of ﬁ sh that may be in a river at any one time, so the river stops producing ﬁ sh 
when it gets full.
Sources can be global mechanics: A mechanism that pays the player interest at reg-
ular intervals on the money he owns would be one example. An interest-payment 
mechanism applies throughout the game regardless of anything else, so it is global. 
Sources can also make up part of the mechanics governing the behavior of entities. 
In The Settlers, a stream that produces ﬁ sh is an entity, one of whose attributes is 
the number of ﬁ sh it contains. 
Sources can be limited or unlimited. In Monopoly, the “Go” square constitutes
an unlimited source—according to the rules, it can never run out of money. (If
the bank runs low, the banker may make more money by writing on paper.) But
the collection of houses and hotels stored in the bank is a limited source: Once
the banker sells all the houses and hotels, no more may come into the game. The 
stream in The Settlers is an unlimited source of ﬁ sh. Although it can be temporarily 
empty if too many ﬁ shermen are catching ﬁ sh from it, it goes on producing ﬁ sh 
until it is full, as long as the game is running.
Drains
A drain is a mechanic that determines the consumption of resources—that is, a rule 
specifying how resources permanently drop out of the game (not to be confused 
with a converter, which we’ll look at next). In a shooter game, the player ﬁ ring his 
weapon drains ammunition—that’s what makes ammunition, a resource, disap-
pear. Being hit by an enemy shot drains health points. Enemies drain out of the 
game by dying when their health points reach zero. The most common drain in a 
construction and management simulation is decay—ongoing damage to the objects 
the player constructed, which he must spend resources to reverse or repair. (Decay 
is also sometimes called entropy, although technically entropy refers to increasing 
disorder rather than loss of resources.) Typical decay mechanics look something 
like this: “Each section of road includes a numeric attribute indicating its level of 
decay as a percentage, with 0 (zero) indicating that the section is new and 100 indi-
cating that the section is fully decayed and impassable. Sections of roads begin to 
decay 3 months after they are constructed, and 3 percent is added to their level of 
decay every year, plus an additional 1 percent for every 100,000 car trips over the 
section in the course of that year. When decay reaches or exceeds 100 percent, the 
road section becomes impassable and it must be replaced.”
Because resources are valuable, the player wants to know why a resource disappears 
from the world and what beneﬁ t compensates for its loss. In Monopoly, players get 
money from the bank by passing “Go”—in effect, for no reason at all—but when-
ever a player has to give money back to the bank, the game provides a reason: The 
player owes income tax, incurs a ﬁ ne, or something similar. Players don’t mind get-
ting money for free, but when they have to spend it, they want to know why. 
Explain your drains.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
303
 CHAPTER 10
Converters
A converter is a mechanic—and usually an entity, too—that turns one or more 
resources into another type of resource. In designing a converter, you must specify 
its production rate and the input-to-output ratio that governs the relationship of 
resources consumed to resources produced. The Settlers offers several examples. The 
windmill converts grain into ﬂ our at a rate of one to one, so one bag of grain pro-
duces one bag of ﬂ our. It takes 20 real-time seconds to turn one bag of grain into 
one bag of ﬂ our, so the rate of production of ﬂ our works out to three bags per min-
ute. The iron smelter turns one load of ore into one iron bar, consuming one load 
of coal in the process. However, if fed charcoal instead of coal, the smelter requires 
three loads of charcoal for each iron bar because charcoal is less efﬁ cient than coal.
Traders
A trader mechanic governs trades of goods, generally between the player and the 
game. In a stock-trading game, the trader may be a faceless ﬁ nancial construct; in a 
role-playing game, the trader usually comes in the form of a blacksmith who trades 
in swords or something similar.
Traders cause no change in the game world other than reassignment of ownership. 
If you trade your old dirk and a gold coin for a new short sword, then in theory the 
game still contains that dirk, that coin, and that short sword, although all three 
articles have been assigned to new owners. The trader can, if your game permits it, 
sell the old dirk to the next player who comes along.
THE PROBLEM OF RUNAWAY PROFITS
A player must never be able to repeatedly buy an item from a trader at a low price and 
sell it back at a higher price unless you set limits on the process. If players can buy from 
and sell to traders indeﬁ nitely and rapidly and they can sell something for more than they 
paid for it, they will exploit this ruthlessly, piling up huge fortunes by endlessly buying 
and reselling and ignoring the rest of the game.
You can use various schemes to prevent this. You can make it impossible to make a proﬁ t 
by requiring all subsequent sales to be for less than the original purchase price. If you 
want players to be able to make a reasonable proﬁ t, place limits on the amount of buying 
and selling they can do: Require that they wait a while before selling an item back again, 
or have the trader refuse to sell items to them more than a certain number of times or 
refuse to buy goods back. The trader itself can have limited funds and be unable to buy if 
funds run out. In a multiplayer game, you can let players buy and sell at a proﬁ t to one 
another but not to an automated or NPC trader. Transactions among the players don’t 
change the total amount of money in the game; but selling things back to an automated 
trader mechanic that has an unlimited supply of money has the potential for abuse.
NOTE A trader 
is different from a 
converter. A trader 
changes the ownership 
of things, but does 
not change the things 
themselves. A converter 
turns something into 
something else, con-
suming the ﬁ rst item 
and producing the 
second one.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

304 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
You can also build a bargaining feature into the mechanics of a trader, such that it 
sells at a high price but can, via a user interface mechanism designed for the purpose, 
lower its price after a little haggling. Your scheme might make some traders more 
ﬂ exible than others, thereby encouraging players to shop around for the best deal.
Production Mechanisms
Production mechanism describes a class of mechanics that make a resource conve-
niently available to a player. These include sources that bring the resource directly 
into the player’s hands, but they can also include special buildings, characters, or 
other facilities that gather resources from the landscape and make them available 
to the player. Many real-time strategy games employ special characters to perform 
this function. For instance, in the Command & Conquer series, a harvester vehicle 
collects a resource called tiberium and carries it to a reﬁ nery where it is converted 
into money that the player can use to buy weapons. The harvester is a production 
mechanism; the reﬁ nery is a converter.
Tangible and Intangible Resources
If a resource possesses physical properties within the game world, such as requiring 
storage space or transportation, the resource is said to be tangible. On the other 
hand, if it occupies no physical space and does not have to be transported, it is 
intangible. In a shooter game, ammunition is tangible—it exists in physical form in 
the environment, and the avatar has to carry it around. Most construction and 
management simulations treat money as intangible: It exists as a meaningful 
resource in the game world but takes up no space and has no particular location.
A number of games treat resources in a mixed fashion, sometimes tangible and 
sometimes intangible. In Age of Empires, food and building materials have to be 
transported from their production points to a storage facility; during transport, 
these items can be stolen or destroyed by an enemy. Once stored, however, materi-
als become intangible: They cannot be seized or destroyed even if the enemy 
demolishes the storage facility.
Similarly, most construction and management simulations and real-time strategy 
games don’t require a resource to be physically transported before it can be spent or 
consumed; the commodity simply vanishes. When constructing a building in Age 
of Empires, the player doesn’t transport the stone from the storage pit to the con-
struction site. This takes an extra management burden off the player. The section 
“Logistics” in Chapter 14, “Strategy Games,” discusses the gameplay implications of 
intangible resources at greater length. 
Feedback Loops, Mutual Dependencies, and Deadlocks
A production mechanism that requires some of the resource that the mechanism 
itself produces constitutes a feedback loop in the production process. Note that this 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
305
 CHAPTER 10
use of the term feedback is not related 
to the feedback elements discussed in 
Chapter 8, “User Interfaces.” In the 
context of a user interface, feedback 
refers to a means of giving the player 
information about the effects of his 
actions upon the game world. In the 
context of an internal economy, feed-
back refers to resources that are fed back
into a production mechanism.
So long as the mechanism has a supply 
of the resource to start with and the 
mechanism produces more than it req-
uires, there’s nothing wrong with using
a feedback loop. But if for any reason the
system runs out of the resource, the mech-
anism won’t be able to produce any 
more. This condition, called a deadlock,
locks up that part of the economy unless
you provide some other supply of the 
resource—a way to break the deadlock.
The Settlers III contains a feedback 
loop. The player needs stone to build a stonecutter’s hut in order to house a stone-
cutter who produces more stone (see Figure 10.3). Ordinarily, the game starts with 
some stone already in storage, so if the player builds a stonecutter’s hut right away, 
the stonecutter produces the stone needed for other activities. However, if the 
player uses up all her stored stone constructing other buildings, she might not have 
enough to build a stonecutter’s hut, and she will be in a deadlock—hut building 
can’t proceed without stones; stones can’t be produced without a hut. The Settlers III
provides a way to break the deadlock: The player can demolish another building 
and get back enough raw stone to build a stonecutter’s hut after all. Note that the 
stonecutter’s hut doesn’t actually need stone to operate, but the player does need 
stone to build it in the ﬁ rst place. As long as the player builds and retains one 
stonecutter’s hut, she shouldn’t get into a deadlock.
Two production mechanisms that each require the other’s output as their input in 
order to work are mutually dependent. Again, there’s a loop in the process. If the re-
sources produced by either one are diverted elsewhere and production stops for lack 
of input, this, too, can produce a deadlock.
In designing your game’s internal economy, you need to watch out for deadlocks, 
which can occur whenever there’s a loop in the production process. To avoid dead-
locks, either avoid such loops or provide an alternative source for one of the resources. 
This is the point of collecting $200 when you pass “Go” in Monopoly. A player who 
FIGURE 10.3 The feedback loop in The Settlers III
Needed to 
Stone
Stonecutter’s Hut
Produces


--- PAGE BREAK ---

306 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
owns no properties can’t earn money by collecting rent, but without rent, the player 
can’t buy properties: a deadlock. Monopoly solves this by giving the players money 
to start with and by giving them $200 every time they pass “Go.” As the game pro-
gresses, that $200 becomes less signiﬁ cant, but it is enough to break a deadlock.
DESIGN RULE Provide Means to Break Deadlocks
If your internal economy contains either feedback loops or mutual dependencies, be sure 
you include a means to break a deadlock if one occurs
Static and Dynamic Equilibrium
It’s possible to design a system in such a way that, left alone, it enters a state of 
equilibrium. Static equilibrium is a state in which the amounts of resources pro-
duced and consumed remain constantly the same: Resources ﬂ ow steadily around 
without any signiﬁ cant change anywhere. Dynamic equilibrium occurs when the 
system ﬂ uctuates through a cycle. It’s constantly changing, but it eventually 
returns to a starting point and begins again.
Here’s an example of static equilibrium. Suppose you have a miller grinding wheat 
to make ﬂ our and a baker baking bread from the ﬂ our. If the bakery consumes the 
ﬂ our at exactly the same rate at which the mill produces it, then the amount of 
ﬂ our in the world at any one time will remain static. If you then upset the system 
by stopping the bakery for a while, the ﬂ our will build up. When the bakery 
restarts, the amount of ﬂ our available will be static at the new level. The system 
returns to static equilibrium because the key factors—the production and con-
sumption rates of the mill and the bakery—have not changed (see Figure 10.4).
NOTE The terms 
static and dynamic 
equilibrium are bor-
rowed from economics, 
not from physics. In 
physics, static equi-
librium means that all 
forces on an object 
are equally balanced, 
so the object does not 
move. In economics, 
static equilibrium 
means that supply 
and demand for goods 
are balanced, and 
although the goods 
themselves move, 
the amounts do not 
change.
FIGURE 10.4
An example of static 
equilibrium
Flour builds up
FLOUR 
AVAILABLE
Static equilibrium
TIME
Bakery shuts down
Bakery/resumes


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
307
 CHAPTER 10
Now let’s suppose that only one person does both jobs. She mills enough to bake 
three loaves of bread; then she bakes the three loaves; then she mills again; and so 
on. This is an example of dynamic equilibrium: Conditions are changing all the 
time, but they always return to the same state after a while because the process is 
cyclic. If we tell the woman to stop baking and only mill for a while, and then re-
sume baking later, again the ﬂ our builds up. When she resumes baking, the system 
settles into a new state of dynamic equilibrium (see Figure 10.5).
When a game such as a construction and management simulation settles into a 
static equilibrium, players can easily judge the effect of their actions on the system 
by making one small change and watching the results. This makes the game easy to 
learn and play. Dynamic equilibrium is more difﬁ cult for players to handle. With 
the system in constant ﬂ ux, it’s hard to tell whether the changes players see result 
from a natural process or from something they’ve done.
Settling into a state of equilibrium, static or dynamic, takes the pressure off the 
player. She can simply watch the game run for a while and make adjustments when 
she feels like it. Some construction and management simulations do work that way, 
but most give the player more of a challenge. Rather than settling into equilibrium, 
the designers build in a factor that requires the player to take action to prevent the 
system from running out of some needed resource. To use our milling–baking met-
aphor, perhaps the player has to take action to keep the mill supplied with wheat. If 
the player doesn’t keep an eye on the wheat supply, both milling and baking come 
to a halt. In Age of Empires, farms produce food automatically, but after a while they 
stop working and the player must intervene to rebuild them. In SimCity, the roads 
wear out and the player has to repair them.
Whether your system settles into equilibrium or runs down without player action, 
one thing is certain: The player should always have to do something to obtain 
growth—he should have to press on the gas pedal of your game, as it were. If the 
FIGURE 10.5 
A new state of dynamic 
equilibrium
Flour builds up
FLOUR 
AVAILABLE
Dynamic equilibrium
TIME
Baking stops, milling continues
Triggers
Baking resumes
Cycles of milling and baking


--- PAGE BREAK ---

308 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
system can grow constructively and proﬁ tably of its own accord, there’s no reason 
for the player to interfere. This is the player’s primary challenge: ﬁ guring out how 
to produce growth using the many (metaphorical) levers and knobs that you pro-
vide via the core mechanics. In effect, the player is himself an element of the 
economy, and growth depends on his active participation.
Core Mechanics and Gameplay
Figure 10.1 shows that, during play, the core mechanics present challenges to the 
player and accept actions from the player, both mediated by the user interface. So 
far, our discussion has concentrated on the core mechanics as a description of a sys-
tem, without addressing the role of the player. The core mechanics manage the 
gameplay of the game, implementing all player actions and many challenges. This 
section discusses how that works.
Challenges and the Core Mechanics
The core mechanics implement the mechanisms by which most challenges operate, 
and they perform tests to see whether a challenge has been surmounted. The chal-
lenges that the core mechanics present may appear at any level of the challenge 
hierarchy, from atomic challenges to the victory condition for the entire game. 
Remember that the level design actually speciﬁ es the type and placement of indi-
vidual challenges for each level, but the core mechanics implement challenges, if 
necessary, when the player encounters them.
PASSIVE CHALLENGES
Suppose the level designers want to set up a purely static obstacle as a challenge, 
such as a wall that the avatar must climb over in an action game. You would not 
need to create an entity to represent the wall or a mechanic to present the chal-
lenge itself; the wall would simply be an unchanging feature of the landscape. The 
mechanics play a role in implementing the action the player takes to meet the chal-
lenge (climbing) but play no role in presenting the challenge itself. This type of 
challenge is called a passive challenge.
If the level designers need to detect that a player has conquered a passive challenge 
(in order to give a reward, perhaps), they design a special event that occurs when 
the avatar arrives on the other side of the wall—that is, when the avatar’s location 
attributes meet a condition that the level designers establish. Otherwise, the play-
er’s presence on the other side implies success, which doesn’t require any special 
mechanics.
NOTE Passive chal-
lenges do not require 
mechanics to operate, 
though level designers 
may want to establish 
a condition to detect 
when the challenge 
has been surmounted. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
309
 CHAPTER 10
ACTIVE CHALLENGES
Suppose that the level designers want to set up a more complex challenge for the 
player, such as a puzzle that the player manipulates to unlock a door. Your design 
for the core mechanics must supply the level designers with the necessary entities 
and mechanics to deﬁ ne the puzzle, allow the player to interact with it, display the 
consequences of her actions, and detect when the puzzle has reached its solution 
state. This is an active challenge.
An enemy character that the player must defeat in combat represents another 
active challenge. The core mechanics deﬁ ne the characteristics and the AI of the 
enemy character. The level designers place that character at a location in the land-
scape by setting his location attributes and perhaps they also set some other 
attributes, such as health and ammunition. In effect, your design creates the tools 
and parts that the level designers use to build levels, create puzzles, position ene-
mies, and so on. In a long game, the level designers probably reuse the same tools 
several times to create variants of the same challenge in different parts of the game. 
(This is one of the reasons why the same characters seem to appear over and over 
in a game: The level designers reuse the basic mechanics.)
Actions and the Core Mechanics
The challenges in a game vary from level to level in type, frequency, sequence, and 
other respects, but the actions available to the player normally do not change from 
level to level except that, in some games, more actions become available as the 
player progresses through the game. Consequently, the level designers play a 
smaller role in determining what actions are available than they do in choosing 
challenges for a level, though they can choose challenges that tend to require the 
use of some actions more than others. (Sometimes level designers also specify that 
familiar actions should not be available. See “Make Atypical Levels Optional” in 
Chapter 12.)
PLAYER ACTIONS TRIGGER MECHANICS
When you design the core mechanics, you must specify a mechanic that imple-
ments each action in each gameplay mode, which will either initiate an event or 
start or stop a process. When the user interface detects data arriving from an input 
device, UI routines determine what action the player desires by checking the 
assignment of actions to buttons (or similar control devices) established by the 
gameplay mode’s interaction model. The UI then triggers whatever mechanic you 
speciﬁ ed for that action.
Let’s look at a simple example from a ﬁ rst-person game. When a player presses a 
button assigned to the crouch action, the UI triggers a crouch mechanic that imple-
ments the action. You must deﬁ ne this mechanic to do two things. First, it changes 
a symbolic posture attribute of the avatar from the walking upright state to the 
NOTE Active 
challenges require 
mechanics that imple-
ment their activity. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

310
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
crouching state. (This attribute may affect other mechanics—it could inﬂ uence how 
big a target the crouching ﬁ gure presents—but the crouch mechanic does not imple-
ment those effects itself.) Next, because all actions should be accompanied by 
feedback, your crouch mechanic lowers the value of a numeric attribute of the ava-
tar that determines how far the avatar’s head is above the ground. The graphics 
engine detects this and shows the ﬁ rst-person view from a crouching, rather than 
an upright, perspective.
ACTIONS ACCOMPANIED BY DATA
More complicated actions may involve manipulation or storage of data that arrives 
from the user interface. In such cases, you must create both an event mechanic that 
implements the action and an entity that stores the data. The user interface sets the 
value of the entity for the mechanic to interpret.
Suppose that in our ﬁ rst-person game, the player uses a mouse to control which 
direction the avatar faces, and he moves the mouse to the right. This input trans-
lates into an action, causing the avatar to turn to the right. But a mouse is an 
analog device, not a binary one like a controller button, so in addition to the infor-
mation that the mouse moved, the UI also sends data about how far it moved. This 
event requires a mechanic that must interpret the data and make the appropriate 
changes to the avatar’s direction-facing attribute.
Core Mechanics Design
Entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter necessitatem. (Do not create more entities than 
necessary.)
—ATTRIBUTED TO WILLIAM OF OCCAM
Designing the core mechanics consists of identifying the key entities and mechan-
ics in the game and writing speciﬁ cations to document the nature of the entities 
and the functioning of the mechanics. This is the very heart of the game designer’s 
job, and the more complex the game, the longer it takes—sometimes weeks or 
months. Because you can make so many kinds of games, this book can describe the 
process only in general terms. Use your knowledge of existing games and of your 
chosen genre to ﬁ ll in the details.
Reading this chapter alone gives you the tools to document your core mechanics, 
but it doesn’t contain the information necessary to create a balanced game. Don’t 
start designing your mechanics until you have also read Chapter 11, “Game 
Balancing.”
TIP Implement 
actions in the core 
mechanics by creating 
mechanics that the 
user interface can trig-
ger and entities that 
the user interface can 
supply with data from 
the input devices. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
311
 CHAPTER 10
Goals of Core Mechanics Design
Before looking into the question of how to go about designing the core mechanics, 
remember what you are actually trying to achieve with your design. Never forget 
that your ultimate goal is to create entertainment for the player—that’s the point
of the quote from Molière at the beginning of the chapter. But in addition to this 
overarching objective, certain principles help you design an enjoyable game 
efﬁ ciently.
STRIVE FOR SIMPLICITY AND ELEGANCE
The most elegant games operate with the smallest number of rules. Some of the 
greatest games are those whose mechanics are extremely simple yet still manage to 
offer interesting variety. As the quote from William of Occam suggests, try to avoid 
making your mechanics too complex. Simple games are easier for players to learn, 
and that gives simple games a broader appeal than complicated ones.
You can maintain players’ interest with a variety of content that explains a small 
number of mechanics in a large number of ways. As mentioned in the sidebar “The 
Rules and Core Mechanics of Monopoly,” the general rules of Monopoly are simple, 
but the Chance and Community Chest cards create additional interest. The major-
ity of these cards concern the transfer of money to or from the player who draws 
the card—a simple mechanic—but each card gives a different explanation for why 
the money is being transferred (such as “Income tax refund, collect $20”). The 
explanations are purely cosmetic, but they add variety. You can build similar fea-
tures into your own game while still keeping the rules simple.
LOOK FOR PATTERNS, THEN GENERALIZE
Learn to recognize patterns in your ideas for your game and to convert them into 
generalized systems rather than trying to document dozens of individual cases. Here’s 
an example. Suppose you decide that swamp leeches really belong in water and that 
a swamp leech should lose 10 points of health for every minute that it’s out of the 
water. Later, you decide that a salamander (a mythical ﬁ re-loving creature) should 
lose 5 points of health for every minute that it’s out of the ﬁ re. A pattern emerges: 
Certain creatures are dependent upon their native environment, and they lose 
health at a speciﬁ ed rate when they leave it. Instead of describing this mechanic 
over and over for each creature, explain the general case only once, for all environ-
ment-dependent creatures. Note that each creature in the game will need two 
attributes to support this mechanic: a symbolic attribute indicating what the crea-
ture’s native environment is (water, ﬁ re, and so on, and be sure to include a special 
value to use if the creature is not dependent on any environment), and a numeric 
attribute stating the rate at which the creature loses health when out of its environ-
ment (the value should be zero if the creature is not environment-dependent). 
Then, as you design each creature in your game, you can decide what values these 
attributes should have without having to document the whole mechanism again.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

312
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
By designing general patterns rather than individual cases, you can more easily 
understand how your game will really work, and you will also make it easier for the 
programmers to program it. The programmers will write general-case code that 
applies most of the time, rather than having to write separate subroutines for each 
creature. You can still create a few special cases for variety or when circumstances 
require it. In Monopoly, the rules for collecting rent on colored properties (the ones 
named after streets) are the general case, while the railroads and utilities are special 
cases that create additional interest. But try to avoid creating large numbers of spe-
cial cases.
DON’T TRY TO GET EVERYTHING PERFECT ON PAPER
Unless you’re designing a trivially simple game, you won’t get everything perfectly 
right on paper, because you won’t be able to compute the effects of all your mechanics
in your head. Designing core mechanics (and just about everything else in a video 
game, too) requires iterative reﬁ nement. Create a ﬁ rst draft of your mechanics and 
then build a prototype that implements them, either in a spreadsheet program or 
in software. Test and adjust your mechanics using the prototype. If you try to get 
everything exactly right on paper, you won’t ever get the project ﬁ nished. Although
this may sound odd, it is more important to be clear and precise in your documen-
tation than it is to be accurate. You will ﬁ nd it much easier to correct a mechanic 
that doesn’t work quite the way you expected than to try to resolve ambiguous lan-
guage late in the development process.
FIND THE RIGHT LEVEL OF DETAIL
You can design core mechanics at any level of detail, but there are tradeoffs. If you 
document the core mechanics minutely, with no detail left unaddressed, the pro-
grammers can turn your mechanics directly into code very quickly. That seems like 
a good idea in principle, but in practice you will almost certainly be swamped with 
work. Designers who try to document every single thing about the core mechanics 
delay their projects—or cause them to be canceled.
The problem at the opposite end of the spectrum, leaving too much unclear, is 
almost as bad. Either the programmers will have to come and ask you for further 
details, or they will make their best guess for themselves. If you have clearly com-
municated your vision to them, and you see eye to eye about how the game should 
work in principle, then their guesses may be good ones. But in practice, the pro-
grammers will often make assumptions other than what you intended, and you’ll 
notice the mistake in the tuning phase. It can be time consuming to go back and 
correct bugs introduced by ambiguous design decisions.
To ﬁ nd a happy medium, use traditional gaming conventions where appropriate to 
avoid overloading yourself. If your game features some very ordinary scenarios and 
you are conﬁ dent that the programmers will know what you mean, you can afford 
to use general language. You don’t have to write, “When a car’s number of laps 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
313
 CHAPTER 10
attribute goes over 500, set the eligible to win ﬂ ag to TRUE for that car. Continuously 
check all cars to see if the location attributes of the cars that are eligible to win show 
that they are on or beyond the ﬁ nish line. Set the winner entity with the number of 
the ﬁ rst car whose location attribute meets that condition.” It’s okay just to say, 
“The ﬁ rst car that has completed all 500 laps and crosses the ﬁ nish line is the win-
ner,” because this is a perfectly familiar situation.
The less familiar the mechanisms that you document, the more speciﬁ c you need 
to be, especially if any of them run counter to convention. In the dart game 301, 
the player starts with a score and reduces that score by the amount that he hits on 
the dartboard. The object of the game is to be the ﬁ rst to achieve a score of exactly 
zero. Because this runs counter to convention, it’s the sort of thing you have to 
explain more precisely. Similarly, the mechanic that describes the behavior of 
female dragons in the earlier sidebar “Analyzing a Mechanic” requires more detail 
because female dragons are entirely imaginary; nobody can count on his existing 
experience with dragons to know how they should behave.
If you know how to program even a little bit, you can write pseudo-code to docu-
ment processes that you need to explain extremely carefully. Pseudo-code includes 
the if and while statements that indicate conditional or repeated operations but 
without exact variable names or the other syntactic features of a real programming 
language. Pseudo-code can be handy in circumstances that call for precise explana-
tions, which is why potential designers would beneﬁ t by taking at least one class in 
programming. It doesn’t much matter what language you study, as long as it 
includes the concepts of conditional and repeated execution.
Revisit Your Earlier Design Work
To begin designing the core mechanics, go back to your earlier design work and 
reread it to identify entities and mechanics. Make a list of the nouns and verbs that 
you encounter. Whenever you come across a noun in your design documents, that 
noun will probably be implemented in the core mechanics as an entity, a resource, 
or both. Whenever you see a verb, that action will probably be implemented as a 
mechanic. Also watch for sentences that include the words if, when, and whenever.
These designate conditions that will become part of the mechanics.
Look particularly closely at the following items:
■ Your answers to the question, “What is the player going to do?” The answers 
to this question give the player’s role and some information about the challenges 
he will face and the actions he will perform. They will include some of the most 
critical nouns and verbs of all. Even if the answer is simply “ﬂ y an airplane,” it con-
tains the key verb for the whole game, ﬂ y, and the key noun, airplane.
■ Your ﬂ owboard of the game’s structure. Each gameplay mode and shell menu 
represents a separate state of the mechanics, so the mechanics will require a sym-
bolic entity to keep track of the current gameplay mode during play.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

314 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ Your list of gameplay modes and your plans for them. Be sure to pay special 
attention to the challenges and actions you plan to offer the player in each mode 
and any user interface feedback and control mechanisms you have speciﬁ ed.
■ The general outline of the story you want to tell, if any. If it’s a branching or 
foldback story, look at the structure that you made for it. Take note of the circum-
stances that cause it to branch. You will convert these into conditions.
■ The names of any characters you planned for your story. Unless these charac-
ters only appear in narrative events, they will certainly be entities in the core 
mechanics.
■ Your general plans for each level in the game. Unless the level designers are 
already at work, you won’t have speciﬁ c details, but you will know what kinds of 
things you wanted to include in each level.
■ The progression of the levels that you want to provide, if the levels progress in 
a sequence. Note whether any information carries over from level to level; you will 
create entities to store the data.
■ Any victory or loss conditions that you expect to use (or that you anticipate 
the level designers will want to establish).
■ Any non-gameplay actions that you may wish to include, such as moving the 
virtual camera, pausing or saving the game, and other forms of creative play.
Certain nouns and verbs in this material may not apply to the core mechanics. If
a noun describes a passive landscape feature that acts as a challenge or something 
purely cosmetic, you can cross it off your list. If a verb describes an activity unre-
lated to gameplay, such as setting the volume level of the sound effects, you can 
cross that off, too.
List Your Entities and Resources
Once you have your list of nouns, decide whether each represents a resource, an 
independent entity, an attribute of another entity—or perhaps none of the above, 
in which case, you can cross those off the list. Now you have a list of resources and 
entities. For each item on your list, consider these questions:
■ Does the noun describe a resource—some item or substance that changes in a 
general way throughout the game? Or does it describe an entity, a particular value, 
or quantity?
■ If the noun describes an entity, is the entity simple or compound? If simple, is it 
symbolic or numeric? If symbolic, what states can it take? If numeric, what is the 
range of numbers? What will its initial symbolic or numeric value be? These initial 
data form a critical part of the core mechanics that you will tune throughout the 
development process. Write them down in your document or in a spreadsheet.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
315
 CHAPTER 10
■ If the noun describes a compound entity, what attributes describe it? (They 
might be elsewhere on the list, or you might have to invent some new ones.) Add 
any new attributes to your deﬁ nition of the compound entity and go back to the 
previous question to determine their qualities.
Unless a game offers only one gameplay mode and no shell menus (which would be 
extremely rare), it will undoubtedly require an entity to record which gameplay 
mode or shell menu the game occupies at any given time.
This process will give you an initial list of all the resources and entities your game 
features. It won’t be a complete list; you will undoubtedly add more as work goes 
on. If your early design stated generalities but not speciﬁ cs, add the details now. 
Suppose you wrote, “Level 5 will consist mostly of formal logic puzzles.” At this 
point, you must deﬁ ne the entities that the level designers will require to build the 
formal logic puzzles. Will the player drag tiles, ﬂ ip switches, and click on colored 
marbles? Then add tiles, switches, and marbles to your list of entities. Now you’ve 
got some attributes to think about: The tiles have positions, the switches have 
states, and the marbles have colors. Write it all down.
Add the Mechanics
With your list of entities and list of verbs, you’re ready to start deﬁ ning the 
mechanics. Again reread your earlier design work. If any sentence includes or 
implies the word somehow, now is the time to deﬁ ne exactly how. “The player gets 
money” or “gets money somehow” must turn into a precise speciﬁ cation of when 
the player’s money entity increases and by what amount.
As you read, remember that mechanics consist of relationships, events, processes, and 
conditions.
THINK ABOUT YOUR RESOURCES
Start with any resources that you identiﬁ ed in the previous step and think about 
how they ﬂ ow through the game. What sources bring them into the game? What 
drains remove them? Can they be traded or converted automatically into another 
resource? Every source, every drain, and every conversion requires mechanics that 
determine how a conversion operates, when, and at what rate. Also ask yourself 
what happens when the resource runs out. If nothing much changes, you may not 
need the resource. Because a resource is a general concept rather than a speciﬁ c 
quantity like an entity, you may be able to determine a lot about a resource’s 
mechanics just by thinking through the resource ﬂ ow in the economy.
Remember that games that don’t deal in numeric quantities don’t have resources. 
Such games contain only symbolic entities.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

316
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
STUDY YOUR ENTITIES
Once you have a good grasp of your resources’ sources, drains, and conversions, 
move on to your entities. Go down your list of entities and ask the following ques-
tions about each one:
■ Does this entity store an amount of a resource, and if so, have I already docu-
mented how it works in the previous step?
■ What events, processes, and relationships affect the entity? What conditions 
apply to these events, processes, and relationships?
■ What events, processes, and relationships does the entity contribute to? What 
conditions apply to them?
■ What can the entity do by itself, if anything? Any entity that can do something 
by itself—whether the entity is as simple as a detector or as complicated as an 
NPC—requires mechanics to deﬁ ne what it does and how.
■ What can the player do to the entity, if anything? If the player can manipulate 
the entity, he requires an action to do so, and actions require mechanics.
■ Is this a symbolic entity? If so, it requires mechanics to control how the entity 
gets into each of its possible states.
Many of the verbs in your list of verbs will be associated with particular entities, so 
as you examine an entity, check to see which verbs apply to it and what mechanics 
they imply.
ANALYZE CHALLENGES AND ACTIONS
Go over the list of challenges and actions that you intend to offer in each gameplay 
mode. All the active challenges and each action must have an associated mechanic 
and possibly some associated data. (If it requires data, you should already have an 
entity deﬁ ned for it.) How does the action affect the world? How does the challenge 
affect the avatar or the other entities under the player’s control? Use the answers to 
these questions to document your mechanics.
LOOK FOR GLOBAL MECHANICS
Global mechanics operate all the time, regardless of what gameplay mode or level 
the game may be in. Global mechanics include those that implement actions such 
as pausing the game or, if the player can win or lose in more than one gameplay 
mode or level, detecting the victory or loss conditions. (In many games, the level 
designers specify a different victory condition for each level, but the loss condi-
tions—such as running out of money or health—remain the same in every level.) 
Go through your list of verbs and see how many of them describe global mechan-
ics, and then deﬁ ne how each works.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
317
 CHAPTER 10
Random Numbers and the Gaussian Curve
So many games use random numbers that, although you may not know any pro-
gramming, you should understand how to use random numbers in a computer game.
When a computer generates random numbers, by convention it always does so as a 
real number value greater than or equal to 0 but less than 1. In statistical calcula-
tions, probabilities are always expressed as a fractional value between 0 and 1, so 
an event with a probability of 0.1 has 1 chance in 10, or 10 percent, of occurring. 
To see if an event with a given probability occurs, the computer generates a random 
number, then checks to see if the random number is less than the event’s probabil-
ity. If so, the event happens. The random number is always less than 1, so if an 
event’s probability is exactly 1, the event always happens. The random number is 
never less than 0, so if an event’s probability is 0, it never happens.
The “Numeric Attributes” section of Chapter 14 discusses a number of ways to use 
random numbers when computing things such as whether a weapon hits the point 
at which it’s aimed. A weapon with an accuracy rating of 0.8 hits its mark 80 per-
cent of the time. To see whether a particular shot hits, generate a random number 
and compare the number to the weapon’s accuracy rating. If the random number is 
less than the rating, the weapon hits.
Pseudo-Random Numbers
Random-number generation algorithms normally take an input value, called a seed,
that determines the sequence of random numbers the algorithm produces. If the 
seed is identical each time the game is played, the sequence of random numbers 
that the algorithm generates is identical each time, too. In other words, it’s as if 
each time you play a board game, you get the exact same sequence of die rolls that 
you got the last time you played. Each roll is different from the previous roll, but 
the sequence of rolls is identical. Such numbers are called pseudo-random.
This feature is extremely useful when you’re tuning the game’s mechanics. When 
you make adjustments to the mechanics, it is difﬁ cult to determine what the effect 
of your change is if the operation of chance keeps changing the game. By using the 
same seed each time you play, you always get the same random numbers, so the 
effects of chance don’t change from one playing to the next. The mechanics 
become deterministic and predictable. This quality is also essential for bug-ﬁ xing.
If a bug happens by chance, it might not happen the next time someone plays the 
game, so the programmer won’t be able to ﬁ nd it and ﬁ x it. If the game uses 
pseudo-random numbers, the bug should be easier to reproduce.
Naturally, in the ﬁ nal version of the game that the customer buys, you won’t want 
the effects of chance to be the same on each play through. Just before the game is 
ready to ship, the programmers will change the code to take the seed from some 
random source, such as the system clock, so the player will get a different experi-
ence each time he plays.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

318 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Monte Carlo Simulation
If you have a simple deterministic mechanic that simulates some real-world effect, 
then it doesn’t take long to see if it works correctly. For example, the gears in a car’s 
drive train govern the relationship between the speed of a car’s engine and the 
speed of the car’s wheels. It’s a ﬁ xed mathematical relationship and easy to com-
pute. On the other hand, if you design a complicated mechanic with all sorts of 
factors, it may be difﬁ cult to predict how it will behave. You don’t have time to test 
all possible outcomes to make sure they all make sense. Instead, you can do some-
thing called Monte Carlo simulation.
In Monte Carlo simulation, you make a large number of test runs of your system 
using random inputs, and record the results in a ﬁ le. Then you can examine the ﬁ le 
and make sure that the outcomes reﬂ ect the behavior that you expect. Here’s an 
example: Many sports games let the player manage a team throughout a whole sea-
son, and play each match that the real team would play. The game simulates all the 
other matches in the league season (the ones not involving the player’s team) auto-
matically. If you don’t want the machine to play each simulated match through 
moment by moment, which the player probably won’t want to wait for, you will 
need to design a mechanic that fakes it; an algorithm that generates the win-loss 
results for all the other matches without really playing them. Your mechanic will 
probably be based on the attributes (such as the performance characteristics) of the 
athletes on the team. (The section “Simulating Matches Automatically” in Chapter 
16, “Sports Games,” discusses this issue in more detail.) But how can you be sure 
that your mechanic produces realistic results? You can try it by hand a few times, 
but that’s not enough to constitute a serious test.
To perform a Monte Carlo simulation, randomly generate two teams of athletes, with 
a variety of random attribute settings for each athlete, then apply your mechanic to 
them and record which team wins. Do this repeatedly, 1000 times or so. Afterwards, 
analyze the data from the simulations to see if any anomalies occurred. Did a weak 
team ever beat a strong team? Did it happen often, or was it a ﬂ uke? If it was a 
ﬂ uke, happening once in 1000 times, that’s OK—if sports matches were completely 
predictable they’d be boring. But if it happened often, you know your mechanic 
has a problem. If you know statistical methods, you can compute the correlation 
between the inputs (relative team strength) and the outputs (who won) and make 
sure that there’s a positive correlation between strength and victory.
People use Monte Carlo simulation for all sorts of things: to predict proﬁ ts when 
people buy products at different price points, to predict the failure rate of new 
products, and so on. Microsoft Excel and other spreadsheet programs contain built-
in tools for performing Monte Carlo simulations. If you can deﬁ ne your mechanic 
in a spreadsheet, you can easily use these tools.
NOTE This method 
of simulating a process 
with a variety of 
random inputs is 
named after the famous 
casino at Monte Carlo. 
Gambling games all 
use random values 
(shufﬂ ed cards, thrown 
dice, and so on), but 
by repeated simulation 
a casino can compute 
the probable proﬁ t-
ability of a particular 
game.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CORE MECHANICS 
319
 CHAPTER 10
Uniform Distribution
When a computer generates a random number, it ordinarily does so with a uniform 
distribution. That means the chance of getting any one number exactly equals the 
chance of getting any other number. It’s like rolling a single die: There’s an equal 
chance that a die will land on any one of its faces. That is exactly the behavior you 
will want whenever you ask the computer to choose among a certain number of 
equally probable options. For example, if you specify that four possible answers in
a multiple-choice quiz game should be presented to the player in a random order, 
you’ll want the possibilities to be mixed up so that each answer has an equal 
chance of being presented ﬁ rst, second, third, or fourth.
You can create a uniformly distributed die roll value with the following formula 
(and by discarding any digits after the decimal point in the result):
Die Roll = (Random number × Number of faces on the die) + 1
Nonuniform Distribution
In other circumstances, you may not want the random values to be evenly distrib-
uted but may instead want some values to occur frequently and others to occur 
only rarely. Suppose you’re designing a game about Olympic archery. The player 
will compete against an artiﬁ cial opponent, and you want to use a random number 
to decide where the artiﬁ cial opponent’s arrow lands. At the Olympics, the chances 
that an archer will hit the bull’s-eye are pretty high. The chances that he’ll miss 
the target entirely are extremely low. In specifying where the arrow lands, you 
won’t want it to be uniformly distributed across the target, you’ll want it to have a 
better chance of landing in the middle than anywhere else.
One of the simplest ways to achieve this result is to generate more than one uniformly 
distributed random number (that is, roll several dice) and add the resulting numbers 
together to give you a value. This does not yield a uniform distribution of values; 
the values tend to cluster around a central point, with few values at the extremes.
Here’s an example. We all know that if you roll two six-sided dice and add them 
together, the chance of rolling a 7 is much higher than the chance of rolling a 2 or 
a 12. But how much higher? As you design the core mechanics of your game, this is 
something you need to know.
Rolling two six-sided dice and adding the results can produce any of 11 possible 
values, from 2 (two 1s) to 12 (two 6s). Of 36 possible combinations of two six-sided 
dice, only one combination yields a 2: throwing two 1s. On the other hand, there 
are six possible ways to get a 7: 1 + 6, 2 + 5, 3 + 4, 4 + 3, 5 + 2, and 6 + 1. So when 
you roll two six-sided dice, you’re six times as likely to roll a 7 as you are to roll a 2.
The rules of Dungeons & Dragons specify that certain types of random numbers 
must be generated by rolling three six-sided dice and adding them together. With 
three dice, the chances are even higher that the result will be somewhere in the 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

320 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
middle. There are 216 possible combinations, producing 12 possible values from 3 
(1 + 1 + 1) to 18 (6 + 6 + 6). There are 27 ways to throw a 10 or an 11, but again, only 
one way to throw a 3 or an 18. In other words, you’re 27 times as likely to roll a 10 
as you are an 18.
The Gaussian Curve
When you add dice together like this, the probability of each possible result forms a 
bell-shaped, or Gaussian, curve, a phenomenon familiar to mathematicians. Figure 
10.6 shows a graph of all the possible results when rolling three six-sided dice and 
adding the resulting numbers.
It’s important that you realize what this means for your game. If you use this addi-
tive dice mechanism and you specify that a player must roll an 18 to succeed at a 
task, he has only one chance in 216 of actually rolling it. That’s less than one-half 
of 1 percent. In other words, it will almost never happen. This system is not the 
same as rolling one die with 16 faces numbered from 3 to 18. With one such die, 
the chance of rolling an 18 is identical to the chance of rolling any other face, one 
in 16, or 6.25 percent. That’s far more than one chance in 216.
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
These curves describe many phenomena in the universe, from the pattern of water 
droplets falling from a central point to the intelligence levels of animals (and 
humans). To put it succinctly, most things lie somewhere in the middle of the 
curve; rare things lie in the extremes. When that’s the sort of effect you want in 
your game design, use a Gaussian distribution.
FIGURE 10.6
The Gaussian curve 
produced by rolling 
three six-sided dice 
and adding the result-
ing numbers
Number of Ways to Throw a Given Value
Added Values of Three Six-Sided Dice


--- PAGE BREAK ---

