CORE MECHANICS 
323
 CHAPTER 10
7. Are there any global mechanics in the game? What mechanic governs the way 
the game changes from mode to mode?
8. For each entity and resource, does it come into the game world at a source, or 
does it start off in a game world that does not provide a source for additional enti-
ties or resources? If it does come in at a source, what mechanics control the 
production rate of the source?
9. For each entity and resource, does it go out of the game world at a drain, or does 
it all remain in the game world and never leave? If it does go out at a drain, what 
conditions cause it to drain?
10. What conversion processes exist in your world? What trader processes exist? Do 
any feedback loops or mutual dependencies exist? What means have you provided 
to break or prevent deadlocks?
11. Can your game get into a state of equilibrium, static or dynamic? Does it include 
any form of decay or entropy that prevents states of equilibrium from forming?
12. How do mechanics create active challenges? Do you need to establish any 
mechanics to detect if a challenge has been surmounted?
13. How do mechanics implement actions? For each action that may arrive from the 
user interface, how do the core mechanics react?
14. For autonomous entities such as nonplayer characters, what mechanics control 
their behavior? What mechanics deﬁ ne their AI?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Game Balancing
To be enjoyable, a game must be balanced well—it must be neither too easy nor too 
hard, and it must feel fair, both to players competing against each other and to the 
individual player on his own. In this chapter, you’ll learn what qualities a well-bal-
anced game has, and how to balance your own. We’ll begin by examining dominant 
strategies and how to avoid them. We’ll look at ways to set up and balance both 
transitive and intransitive relationships among player choices and how to make them 
simultaneously interesting and well balanced. We’ll also look at ways to incorpo-
rate chance into games in such a way that the game still rewards the better player.
The bulk of the chapter examines two major issues of balance: fairness and difﬁ -
culty. The meaning of fairness differs between player-versus-player and player-
versus-environment games, and we’ll address each separately. The question of 
difﬁ culty applies primarily to player-versus-environment games, and this chapter 
will expand upon ideas in Chapter 9, “Gameplay,” explaining the various factors 
that affect the player’s perception of difﬁ culty and how to manage those factors.
Next we’ll look at the role of positive feedback in games: how to use it and how to 
control it. Finally, we’ll brieﬂ y investigate the problems of stagnation, trivialities, 
and how to design your game in order to make the tuning stage of the process easier.
What Is a Balanced Game?
So divinely is the world organized that every one of us, in our place and time, is in balance 
with everything else.
—JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE
As with so many other game design concepts, the conventional notion of balance
deﬁ es formalization. In the most general sense, a balanced game is fair to the player 
(or players), is neither too easy nor too hard, and makes the skill of the player the 
most important factor in determining his success. In practice, several different 
game features combine to produce these qualities, and game balancing refers to
a collection of design and tuning processes that create those qualities in a game 
under development.
The concept of balance differs considerably depending upon whether we speak of 
games in which a player plays against one or more opponents (whether human 
players or artiﬁ cial opponents implemented by software) or of games in which a 
player faces challenges posed by the game world, without an opponent. The ﬁ rst 
CHAPTER 11
324


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
325
 CHAPTER 11
type of game, in which the player faces one or more opponents (even artiﬁ cial 
ones), is called a player-versus-player (PvP) game. The second type is a player-versus-
environment (PvE) game. As you look at the techniques for balancing a game, note 
how they differ between PvP and PvE games.
A well-balanced game of either type, PvP or PvE, possesses the following 
characteristics:
■ The game provides meaningful choices. If the game allows the player to 
choose from several possible strategies for approaching the game’s challenges, no 
strategy should be so much more effective than the others that there is no point in 
ever using a different one. If such a dominant strategy exists, it indicates a poorly 
balanced game. When a game gives a player a choice of strategies, each strategy 
must have a reasonable chance of producing victory. The later section “Avoiding 
Dominant Strategies” discusses such strategies.
■ The role of chance is not so great that player skill becomes irrelevant. This 
does not mean that a player cannot have bad luck, but in the long run—over the 
course of a long game or over the course of many short games—a better player 
should be more successful than a poor one.
A well-balanced PvP game also possesses the following qualities:
■ The players perceive the game to be fair. As Chapter 1, “Games and Video 
Games,” explained, the exact meaning of fairness varies among different players. 
The later “Making PvP Games Fair” section addresses this further.
■ Any player who falls behind early in the game gets a reasonable opportu-
nity to catch up again before the game ends. The deﬁ nitions of early in the game
and a reasonable opportunity vary depending on how long the designer expects a 
game to last. If a player falls behind in the ﬁ rst 10 minutes of a 2-hour game and 
the rules give him no chance to catch up, most players would perceive that game as 
unfair, and a game designer would describe that game as poorly balanced. Similarly, 
a game that the designer intends to last 2 hours but that someone invariably wins 
in 15 minutes also gives other players no time to catch up or even to test their skill. 
These imbalances often indicate problems with positive feedback, a game feature 
that the later section “Understanding Positive Feedback” discusses.
■ The game seldom or never results in a stalemate, particularly among players 
of unequal ability. A stalemate disappoints players because their efforts produce no 
victor. If stalemates occur frequently among players of unequal ability, the game 
violates the principle that player skill should inﬂ uence the outcome more than any 
other factor. Chess, though a well-balanced game, can still end in a stalemate, but 
this seldom happens between players of unequal ability. Other games, such as back-
gammon, make stalemates impossible. “Understanding Positive Feedback” 
addresses this.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

326 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
In a well-balanced PvE game, these characteristics should be evident:
■ The player perceives the game to be fair. In a PvE game, the player’s percep-
tion of fairness involves a number of factors and is complicated by the absence of 
an opponent. The later section “Making PvE Games Fair” addresses these issues.
■ The game’s level of difﬁ culty must be consistent. The perceived difﬁ culty of the 
game’s challenges (described later) remains within a reasonable range so as not to 
surprise the player with abrupt jumps or drops. The perceived difﬁ culty may be low 
or high but should not change suddenly, especially within a single game level. The 
later section “Managing Difﬁ culty” discusses this in detail. 
To balance your game, you need to use certain design and tuning techniques to be 
sure the game exhibits these properties. The remainder of the chapter discusses 
these techniques.
Avoiding Dominant Strategies
A strategy is a plan for playing a game, usually according to a principle or approach 
that the player believes is likely to produce success. One player may favor an aggres-
sive approach while another may depend on a defensive approach, for instance, but 
each thinks her strategy has the better chance of bringing victory. The term domi-
nant strategy, which comes from formal game theory, refers to a strategy that 
reliably produces the best outcome a player may achieve, no matter what her oppo-
nent does. Dominant strategies are undesirable because once a player discovers one, 
she never has any reason to use any other strategy. It makes all other choices point-
less and thus limits the fun the player can have with such a game. Still worse is a 
dominant strategy that one player may use but another player may not, which can 
occur in asymmetric games (the later section “Balancing Asymmetric Games” dis-
cusses this scenario). When that occurs, the dominant strategy not only obviates 
other strategies, it makes the game unfair. Designing your game’s mechanics to 
avoid a dominant strategy is, therefore, an essential part of game balancing.
Sometimes one single choice can be a dominant strategy, if that one choice gives 
the player enough of an advantage. This section refers to player strategies, options, 
and choices interchangeably because any of these may cause one strategy to domi-
nate all others.
Strategies that avoid loss or prevent an opponent from scoring points can also qual-
ify as dominant. Prior to 1955, a basketball team could use endless delaying tactics 
to kill time on the clock to preserve their lead—a dominant strategy because it pre-
vented the other side from getting control of the ball and scoring. Leagues imple-
mented the shot clock to force the team with possession in such situations to shoot 
the ball, thus creating more opportunities for their opponents to get it back.
NOTE The term domi-
nant strategy doesn’t 
mean that the player 
who uses it always 
dominates her oppo-
nent. It means that the 
strategy is superior to 
all the other strategies 
a player has available. 
A player using a domi-
nant strategy can still 
lose through bad luck.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
327
 CHAPTER 11
Dominant Strategies in Video Games
Video games seldom permit players to use strategies so strongly dominant that
they absolutely guarantee victory, although some, whether PvP or PvE games,
allow powerful strategies that give the player little reason to use any other. By far 
the best-known dominant strategy in any PvP video game is the tank rush in 
Westwood’s Command & Conquer: Red Alert. An experienced player playing as the 
Soviet side can devote all of his energies to producing a large force of tanks in the 
early part of the game, then use those tanks to attack the nascent enemy base en 
masse. Against an unprepared opponent, this almost always produces a victory; an 
experienced opponent can prepare for the onslaught, but the tank rush remains so 
effective that it takes the fun out of the game. Many players add an additional rule 
to the game—no tank rushes allowed—just to balance this problem.
Several editions of Madden NFL included unstoppable offensive plays that guaran-
teed success against an AI-controlled opponent. Fighting games, too, are especially 
prone to dominant strategies. In both ﬁ ghting games and football games, the large 
numbers of possible combinations of offensive and defensive actions makes it difﬁ -
cult to test them all. Badly designed characters can also result in dominant strategies;
in Super Street Fighter II Turbo, the secret character Akuma’s unbeatable attack, the 
air ﬁ reball, leaves the rest of the characters with no chance. Tournament matches 
ban the use of Akuma to ensure fair play.
The next few sections discuss ways that dominant strategies can emerge in a video 
game and how to avoid them or remove them by using balancing methods.
TRANSITIVE RELATIONSHIPS AMONG PLAYER OPTIONS
The term transitive describes a relationship among three or more entities so that if
A stands in a certain relationship to B, and B stands in the same relationship to C, 
then A stands in the same relationship to C also. If you may correctly draw this 
conclusion, the relationship displays a property called transitivity. Greater than in 
arithmetic provides an example of a transitive relationship: If A is greater than B, 
and B is greater than C, then A is greater than C.
If a transitive relationship exists among a player’s strategic options, then option A is 
better than option B, and option B is better than option C. Why, then, would a player 
ever use option C? Selecting option A becomes a dominant strategy. To use a con-
crete example, if you design a game so that an aggressive strategy is always better 
than a defensive one and a defensive strategy is always better than a stealthy one, a 
smart player always chooses the aggressive strategy—it is superior to all the others.
To correct this imbalance, you may impose direct costs on using each strategy, costs 
that counteract the superiority of the stronger strategies and so give players a rea-
son to consider the (formerly) weaker strategies as well. To draw an analogy, a lot of 
kids who would like to ride horses have to ride bikes instead because, even though 
horses are more fun to ride, they cost a lot of money.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

328 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Suppose you build a road-racing game in which players vie to earn the most prize 
money available over a series of races. You offer the player the chance to buy one of 
three cars made by three different manufacturers, such as Ford, Dodge, and 
Chevrolet. To make this a meaningful choice, you decide to create some variety 
among the cars so that the Ford is faster than the Dodge, and the Dodge is faster 
than the Chevrolet. If they all cost the same amount and their performance is iden-
tical in other ways, choosing the Ford constitutes a dominant strategy. However, if 
you price each car in proportion to its advantage so that the Ford costs the most 
and the Chevrolet costs the least, the game regains balance. Because the players’ 
goal is to earn money, not merely to win races, the ﬁ nancial disadvantage of the 
faster car offsets its speed advantage if you set the costs correctly.
Setting up direct costs that exactly counter the advantages of certain choices does 
balance the game, but such a clear and obvious balancing mechanism produces a 
game that seems rather bland. The player can see that there’s no real difference 
among the choices. To create a more interesting choice for the player, you can 
instead impose shadow costs. Shadow cost, a term from economic theory, refers to 
secondary, or hidden, costs that lie behind the apparent costs of goods or services. 
For our purposes, a shadow cost is one that the designer creates but doesn’t warn 
the player about explicitly. It serves to balance the game without being blatant 
about the mechanisms. For instance, giving the Ford a smaller fuel tank that 
requires the car to stop to refuel more often in the road race could counter its speed 
advantage. The smaller fuel tank serves as a shadow cost that the player becomes 
aware of through repeated play.
You can hide a shadow cost completely by building it into the mechanics and not 
documenting it in the game’s manual—for instance, not telling the players how big 
the fuel tanks in the cars are so they have to ﬁ nd it out through trial and error. 
More often, a shadow cost is available to the player but not obvious. Continuing 
the same example, the player might be able to learn the sizes of the fuel tanks by 
comparing the numbers on the fuel gauges in each car, but the instructions for the 
game don’t draw attention to it. Another classic example is a weapon that does a 
great deal of damage but has a slow rate of ﬁ re. The slow rate of ﬁ re is a shadow cost 
that the player only discovers once she starts to use the weapon.
Players of PvE games often feel that entirely hidden shadow costs are unfair 
because the player cannot know what costs lurk behind the scenes or learn to com-
pensate for them. For example, if a game reduces a character’s accuracy at throwing 
a javelin in proportion to the weight of the character’s backpack (on the theory 
that throwing a javelin while wearing a heavy backpack is bound to be rather 
uncertain) but never explains this to the player in the manual or anywhere else, 
the player can’t learn to compensate for it. He ﬁ nds that his accuracy worsens at 
times, but he can’t understand why. If he does ﬁ gure it out, he will probably cry 
foul and post a warning on an Internet gaming forum for the beneﬁ t of other play-
ers. A number of game publishers deliberately hide shadow costs from the players 
TIP If you give a 
player an option that 
appears to be clearly 
superior to his other 
options, you can bal-
ance this by imposing 
a higher direct (visible) 
cost for choosing that 
option, or a shadow 
(hidden) cost.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
329
 CHAPTER 11
but reveal the costs in printed strategy guides that the player must pay extra for. 
This is an abusive practice.
In practice, designers most often use transitive relationships to upgrade a player’s 
powers during her progress through the game. The player begins with a single 
option, the weakest, and works her way up to better ones. In other words, she starts 
with the Chevrolet, then receives the Dodge as a reward for good performance, and 
later still receives the Ford. This creates positive feedback, which is covered in a 
later section. If you also make it possible for a player to lose her upgrade due to poor 
performance—going back to the Dodge after a bad performance in the Ford—you 
can create an interesting progression/regression dynamic that can lead to some taut 
and suspenseful gameplay. Take care to ensure that the player can reestablish her 
previous level once she does well again.
INTRANSITIVE RELATIONSHIPS (ROCK-PAPER-SCISSORS)
If the relationship between strategies or other player options is intransitive, then
just because A beats B and B beats C, you can’t assume that A also beats C. Game 
professionals use intransitive relationship to mean not merely a lack of transitivity 
but an explicit loop in which option A beats option B, B beats C, and C beats A
(see Figure 11.1). The game rock-paper-scissors (also called scissors-paper-stone
and Rochambeau) works that way: Paper beats rock, rock beats scissors, scissors
beat paper. This results in a balanced, three-way intransitive relationship (although 
intransitive relationships are not conﬁ ned to systems of only three entities).
Rock
Paper
Scissors
FIGURE 11.1
A three-way 
intransitive relation-
ship, with arrows 
indicating which 
option beats another


--- PAGE BREAK ---

330 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
The rock-paper-scissors (or RPS) mechanism is a classic design technique for avoid-
ing dominant strategies and forms the basis for balancing player strategies in many 
games. Designer David Sirlin pointed out in his article “Rock, Paper and Scissors in 
Strategy Games” that Virtua Fighter 3 includes RPS relationships among general 
types of moves available to the player: Attacking moves beat throwing moves, 
throwing moves beat blocking moves, and blocking moves beat attacking moves 
(Sirlin, 2000). The Ancient Art of War, an early example of a video game that 
includes an RPS relationship, offers players three unit types: knights, archers, and 
barbarians. Knights have an advantage over barbarians, barbarians over archers, 
and archers over knights.
As Chapter 14, “Strategy Games,” explains further, a direct implementation of the 
RPS model without any modiﬁ cations fails to meet the needs of modern war games 
due to its simplicity. It doesn’t offer any interesting choices—there’s no reason to 
choose any one unit or strategy over any of the others. However, as Sirlin points 
out, you can adjust the system to produce different beneﬁ ts. If you give the player 
different amounts of money for winning with rock, paper, or scissors, players have 
to think not only about which object their opponent might choose but which 
choice earns the most money.
Now imagine a system in which instead of just allowing each choice to beat 
another in all circumstances, as in rock-paper-scissors, one choice is marginally 
better than others in some circumstances but not in others. You can make this 
adjustment in the core mechanics of your game, and it need not be a war game. For 
example, suppose you set up a race between a lizard, a frog, and a mouse. The liz-
ard does best on rocky ground; the frog does best in swamps; and the mouse does 
best on grassy ground. If you design the mechanics such that these advantages 
remain slight rather than overwhelming, it will take a while for the players to learn 
about the system of advantages. Make the race course a complex mixture of rocks, 
grassland, and swamps, and give players partial but not total freedom over the 
routes they take. Add some shadow costs: The frog is generally slower than the oth-
ers overall; the mouse has to stop for air every 15 seconds while swimming; and the 
lizard slows down sharply at transitions between types of ground. If you set these 
values carefully, your game remains balanced, and players will have some interest-
ing decisions to make about which creature they would rather play with.
ORTHOGONAL UNIT DIFFERENTIATION
In his lecture at the 2003 Game Developers’ Conference, “Orthogonal Unit 
Differentiation,” game designer Harvey Smith argued that each type of unit a 
player can control in a game (a car, a soldier, an RPG character, or anything else the 
player can command) should be orthogonally different from all the others (Smith, 
2003). By orthogonal, he meant that each kind of unit should be unlike the others 
in a different dimension, not simply more or less powerful when measuring in one 
dimension. The example of the Ford, Dodge, and Chevy in the preceding section 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
331
 CHAPTER 11
differentiates between them in the same dimension—speed—so they are not 
orthogonally different.
To make the player’s choice of units more interesting and to offer her a larger vari-
ety of strategies, Smith suggests that units should not only differ in the magnitude 
of their power at performing one task, as the Fords and Dodges did, but also should 
display entirely different qualities. Ideally, every type of unit should possess capa-
bilities that no other unit has, and this gives each type a distinct role to play in the 
game. Otherwise, there’s little point in including a weaker unit in the game except 
as part of an upgrade path to a stronger one.
The more diverse the types of challenges in your game, the easier you will ﬁ nd it 
to create orthogonally differentiated unit types. In a realistic car racing game, all 
the cars face the same challenge and must be constructed to similar standards, 
which makes racing games a poor ﬁ eld for examples of orthogonal differentiation. 
Player success depends more on driving skill than on the attributes of their cars, 
which is appropriate for a racing game. In a war game, however, opportunities to 
create orthogonally differentiated units abound. Some units may ﬂ y or travel on 
water, whereas others may not; some may transport other units; some may possess 
ranged weapons and others only hand-to-hand weapons; and so on. You cannot 
directly compare the advantages of a unit that wields hand-to-hand weapons with 
the advantages of one that heals the wounded: These qualities make the player’s 
choices more interesting, and success in the game consists of deploying the appro-
priate combination of units to defeat the enemy’s forces.
Orthogonally differentiated units also help to prevent dominant strategies from 
arising if you deﬁ ne the victory condition in such a way that the player must use a 
variety of different units in order to win the game. Many inexperienced chess play-
ers rely on using the queen aggressively, wrongly believing this a dominant strategy 
because she is the most powerful piece on the board. In fact, however, each type of 
chess piece plays a role and they work cooperatively. The queen cannot control the 
board alone; she needs the help of the other pieces. The types of pieces exhibit 
enough diversity to keep games interesting and prevent dominant strategies.
Dominant Strategies in PvE Games
As Chapter 9 explained, most games offer a large number of different types of chal-
lenges but a somewhat smaller number of actions with which to overcome them. 
One action may overcome several different types of challenges. This encourages 
players to experiment to ﬁ nd the right action or combination of actions to sur-
mount each type of challenge, whereas only offering one unique action for each 
type of challenge makes for a dull game.
Implementing fewer actions does introduce a potential problem, however. By creat-
ing actions that can overcome several different kinds of challenges, you risk 
accidentally creating exploits, actions so powerful because of a weakness in the 
design that the player becomes unstoppable. This occasionally happens 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

332 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
when players use an action in a way that you did not expect. For example, in an old 
side-scrolling space-shooter game on the Super Nintendo Entertainment System 
(which this book does not name to avoid embarrassing the individuals responsible), 
the player could, after upgrading her weapons to a certain level, make her way 
through the rest of the game without ever losing a life by traveling as low on the 
screen as possible and keeping her ﬁ nger on the ﬁ re button. Although clearly unin-
tended, this position made her invulnerable to enemy attacks.
No one has yet invented a way to prevent these problems other than through play-
testing, trying as many actions and as many combinations as possible on each 
challenge. The smaller the number of actions that you implement in your game, 
the less likely you are to introduce a dominant strategy by accident because you 
will be able to test them all rigorously. Be especially careful with powerups and spe-
cial actions that give the player more power than usual; these require extra testing.
Incorporating the Element of Chance
The role of chance varies enormously from game to game. Some games, such as 
checkers, make no use of chance at all; in others, such as craps, chance is all-impor-
tant. We’ve seen that skill, not chance, must be the primary factor in determining 
the player’s success. If chance plays a role, how can we ensure that the more skillful 
player wins? Here are several recommendations.
■ Use chance sparingly. Design the game so that chance affects only a minority 
of the player actions that lead to victory and the majority of actions depend on 
skill. This is the simplest solution, but it’s not suitable for all types of games.
If chance is to play a larger role in the game, balance its effects as follows:
■ Use chance in frequent challenges with small risks and rewards rather than 
infrequent challenges with large risks and rewards. Poker provides a good example. 
Chance plays a large role in each hand, but smart players don’t bet large amounts 
on a single hand; they count on the cumulative effect of good play over many 
hands. Player skill remains the major factor that determines winners if a game includes
enough hands. This approach also appears in war games, in which chance plays a 
role in the mechanics governing combat between individual units (although not a 
large role) but plays no direct role in the victory and loss conditions of the mission. 
The inﬂ uence of chance on victory and loss occurs frequently but only on a small 
scale, so good luck tends to cancel out bad luck over time, leaving skill to deter-
mine long-term results.
■ Allow the player to choose actions to use the odds to his advantage. If the 
player knows the probabilities that signiﬁ cant events will occur, he can make deci-
sions that he believes will be to his advantage. Even in a game in which chance 
plays an enormous role, such as craps, the player may choose to bet on different 
outcomes that he believes more or less probable. His skill in making decisions in his 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
333
 CHAPTER 11
favor on the basis of the odds thus plays a role in determining his success. Video 
games seldom tell players the odds explicitly, but with experience, players come to 
learn the odds and make good decisions. If a player has no possibility of acquiring 
knowledge of the odds and gets no opportunity to decide whether to take a risk, 
chance plays too large a role.
■ Allow the player to decide how much to risk. Allow the player to choose how 
much he places at risk at frequent intervals. By offering the player this choice, you 
give him more control over his resources and so tend to reward skill. This again 
becomes critically important in gambling games, as in the game of poker. If you do 
not let the player choose how much to risk on any given challenge that involves 
chance, then the game should not risk too much on his behalf. In a war game, for 
example, chance typically affects the accuracy of each shot. By sending a unit into 
combat, the player risks a few health points on each shot and cannot choose how 
many points he risks. However, he almost always has the option to withdraw the 
unit from combat (retreat); the number of points at risk is seldom very large; and 
one shot typically affects only one unit.
Put simply, don’t use chance to determine large issues unless the player explicitly 
chooses to take large risks (and has the option not to).
Making PvP Games Fair
Part of your job includes making sure that your game is fair and that players per-
ceive it to be fair. Fairness means something different in PvP games than it does in 
PvE games, so we’ll examine them separately. Players generally consider a PvP game 
to be fair if they believe (1) the rules give each player an equal chance of winning 
when play begins and (2) the rules do not give advantage or disadvantage to players 
unequally during the game in ways that they cannot inﬂ uence or prevent apart 
from the operation of chance (in moderation).
Balancing Games with Symmetry
In designing a PvP game, you must decide early on if you want the game to be
symmetric or asymmetric. Chapter 1  introduced the concept of symmetry; see
the section “Symmetry and Asymmetry” there for a refresher if you need one. The 
concept doesn’t apply to PvE games; all PvE games are asymmetric because there is 
only one player.
You will ﬁ nd it easiest to create a PvP game that players perceive as fair if you make 
the game symmetric. Each player begins with the same resources, has the same 
options available to her, faces the same challenges, and tries to achieve the same 
victory condition. The vast majority of traditional games (chess, backgammon, 
Othello, and so on) follow this pattern. So, too, does Monopoly, in which each player 
begins with $1,500 and all launch their tokens from the “Go” square. One player 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

334 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
gets to go ﬁ rst, but because a random roll of the dice controls who begins the game, 
players accept this as fair. (See the sidebar “Who Goes First”? in Chapter 1 for fur-
ther discussion.)
So long as whatever you do for one player you do for all the others, your game will 
remain fair, and little else needs to be said. However, video game players generally 
consider symmetric games rather uninteresting. Symmetric games don’t allow play-
ers to control different forces and study their relative strengths and weaknesses the 
way asymmetric games do. Symmetric games also feel rather contrived, because lit-
tle in the real world is symmetric.
In PvP games, dominant strategies most often occur under asymmetric rules (the 
next section addresses those issues), but a dominant strategy can also occur in sym-
metric games. Because all players start with symmetric attributes and positions, 
they all may use this superior strategy, so it does not create an unfair advantage for 
one player. Nevertheless, such a strategy leaves the players with only one good 
option, so the game isn’t as fun as it could be.
Balancing Asymmetric Games
Asymmetric PvP games run a greater risk of suffering from dominant strategies 
because the players effectively play by different rules. In Fox and Geese, which 
Chapter 1 describes, one player controls a single fox on the game board while the 
other player controls 11 geese (see Figure 1.3). The fox may move in any direction 
and jump over the geese, while the geese may only move toward the fox. The vic-
tory condition for the fox is to jump over all the geese (removing them from the 
board), whereas the victory condition for the geese is to trap the fox so that it can-
not move. Thus, the rules provide entirely different units, available actions, and 
victory conditions for each side. In designing an asymmetric game, you must test 
the mechanics for each type of competitor against every other possible type of 
competitor to make sure that none has a dominant strategy that confers an advan-
tage over all his opponents. This lengthy and involved procedure makes it more 
likely that a mistake will get past the testers.
In addition to the risk of dominant strategies emerging, players often disagree on 
the fairness of an asymmetric game. It becomes much harder to judge whether a 
game really gives all players an equal chance of winning and doesn’t disadvantage 
any player who plays by different rules or with different resources. These arguments 
often result in variants—alternative versions of the rules—which arise to rectify 
what players see as problems. Several variants of Fox and Geese have emerged: one 
that puts more geese on the board, one that includes two foxes instead of one, one 
that lets the geese move backward as well as forward, and so forth.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
335
 CHAPTER 11
CHEATING AI AND SECRET ASYMMETRY
In a single-player PvP game, the player takes on an artiﬁ cial opponent and tries to 
defeat it in exactly the same way she would a human player. Sometimes the single-player 
competition mode in a PvP game is just an added feature in an otherwise multiplayer 
PvP game. When a game is designed this way, the player naturally tends to assume that 
the artiﬁ cial opponent plays by the same rules that a human player would play by in 
its place.
Unfortunately, the AI in many games isn’t good enough to beat a human opponent on 
equal terms. AI can beat most human players in games such as chess and checkers but 
has a harder time with Go and a very hard time with complex war games. To help the AI, 
designers occasionally let it cheat. Some classic cheats include allowing the AI to see 
units that should be hidden by the fog of war; making the AI-controlled units tougher 
than the player’s units, while claiming that they are identical; or giving the artiﬁ cial 
opponent a faster production rate for valuable resources than the player gets for the 
same resources. In effect, what the player thinks is a symmetric game is secretly asym-
metric; the artiﬁ cial opponent plays by different rules.
You should only use this approach as a last resort. Although it can produce a well-
balanced single-player PvP game, players hate it when they discover that the AI is 
cheating against them (and with enough effort, they will discover it eventually). A better 
solution is to be open about the artiﬁ cial opponent’s advantages and build them into a 
set of different difﬁ culty levels for the player to choose from. This allows the player to 
decide for himself how tough an opponent he wants to face, and the game doesn’t have 
to pretend to be symmetric.
THE POINT ASSIGNMENT SYSTEM
You can balance a more complex asymmetric game than Fox and Geese by giving 
the players identical quantities of raw materials at the beginning of the game and 
then letting them choose what units to build using the raw materials. The Macintosh
game Spectre allows players to design a tank by assigning points to three attributes: 
speed, armor (defensive strength), and shot power (offensive strength). Each player 
gets the same number of points, so none has a built-in advantage, but each can 
construct a tank that matches his own preferred style of play.
The point distribution system, while generally fair, doesn’t absolutely guarantee 
that no dominant strategy will emerge. The risk always exists that one particular 
combination of features may be superior to any other combination. To help prevent 
this, the attributes to which the player can assign points should be orthogonally 
related. One attribute should not affect the domain of another attribute. Having 
two closely related attributes, such as health and armor, undermines the point sys-
tem. The player should not be able to gain the same effect by pumping points into 
one attribute as she can by pumping the points into another.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

336 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Also, make sure that spending a point on one attribute magniﬁ es the unit’s power 
in that dimension to the same degree that it magniﬁ es powers in other dimensions 
if the player spends that point on any other attributes. This means that, for exam-
ple, if the player can spend 10 points on strength to double the unit’s strength, 
spending 10 points on intelligence should not multiply the unit’s intelligence by 
1000. If using a point on intelligence produces a signiﬁ cantly greater chance of 
winning than using it on strength, a dominant strategy will emerge: Players will 
always put all their points into intelligence.
THE EXAMPLE OF STARCRAFT
StarCraft offers the most well-balanced combination of asymmetric features in any 
war game available, which explains why, despite being over 10 years old, it remains 
a favorite at gaming tournaments. The game offers players a choice of three races 
called the Terrans (or humans), the Protoss, and the Zerg. Each race produces ﬂ ying 
attack units, construction units, small infantry units, and so on. Most important, 
building these units carries approximately equivalent costs, in terms of raw materi-
als needed: A Zerg, a Protoss, and a Terran each must use similar amounts of 
resources to build units that provide equivalent ﬁ ghting power. The capabilities of 
the units, however, vary from race to race; therefore, the game is asymmetric. The 
Terran construction unit can repair damaged units, so assigning additional con-
struction units to a job can speed repairs. Damaged Zerg units may heal themselves 
without a repair unit, but only at a ﬁ xed rate. Protoss units possess both health, 
which cannot be replaced by any means, and shields, which the Protoss may 
recharge at special locations. Because Protoss units possess both health and shields, 
they usually cost about twice as much as their counterparts in the other races.
StarCraft is an excellent example of a well-balanced asymmetric game, and well 
worth taking the time to study. Buy a strategy guide for the game and read about 
the attributes of the units. Notice how their costs tend to balance their abilities. 
The balance in StarCraft makes use of both direct costs (computed from the amount 
of raw material required to build a unit) and shadow costs—hidden weaknesses.
Balance Issues for Persistent Worlds
Persistent worlds are multiplayer online games that run continuously, offering a 
game world that persists even if a player is not logged in. Chapter 21, “Online 
Games,” discusses persistent worlds but this section addresses a couple of issues
in the context of balancing.
Persistent worlds are never symmetric and are always intrinsically unbalanced 
because long-time players accumulate signiﬁ cant resources and experience that put 
newcomers at a disadvantage. As a result, online games must provide protection and 
encouragement for beginning players. Most now allow players to avoid PvP combat 
unless they speciﬁ cally want to engage in it (Chapter 21 addresses this at further 
length), but online games must also give new players a chance to earn resources, 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
337
 CHAPTER 11
explore areas without ﬁ nding them already crowded by others, take up interesting 
occupations, and so on. A persistent world cannot be a zero-sum game: New 
resources must constantly ﬂ ow into it from outside for new players to ﬁ nd.
The designers of persistent worlds, unlike designers of standalone games, can rebal-
ance on the ﬂ y, changing the rules after their customers begin play. Such rule 
changes, while sometimes necessary, tend to cause howls of outrage from players 
who have optimized their play according to the existing rules and enjoy the game 
as it stands. Most persistent world games have had to implement rule changes this 
way to rectify design errors and to correct imbalances.
In spite of such changes, the persistent world Asheron’s Call remains fundamentally 
unbalanced in favor of magic users. Apparently that’s what the magic users want, 
and obviously the publishers want to hold their audience. In this case, designers 
balance the game in such a way that the majority of players enjoy the game in the 
way they like to play it rather than in such a way as to make the game objectively 
fair. The aim of this balance involves ongoing sales and politics more than it 
involves equal distribution of resources or opportunities—but as a designer, you 
may be required to consider how market forces call for a different kind of balance.
Making PvE Games Fair
Because the challenges in PvE games come from the environment rather than from 
other players, making a fair game involves more than giving all players equal 
opportunities to succeed. In general, players expect a fair PvE game to exhibit qual-
ities enumerated in the following list. Some may not appear to have much to do 
with balance, but we’ll look at them here because they constitute part of a player’s 
notion of fairness.
■ The game should offer the player challenges at a consistent maximum level 
of difﬁ culty, with no sudden spikes. Players regard sudden spikes in difﬁ culty as 
unfair. The next section, “Managing Difﬁ culty,” is devoted to this important issue.
■ The player should not suddenly lose the game without warning and through 
no fault of his own. So-called learn-by-dying designs, once commonplace, are now 
considered unfair. The Immortal, an old Electronic Arts game, notoriously requires 
the player to learn by dying. Fortunately, it allows players to restart the game indef-
initely without having to start over at the beginning, but repeated character death 
still isn’t much fun. You can easily avoid this by providing the player with adequate 
warnings of dangers ahead.
■ A stalemate should not occur. Stalemates can result from deadlock (see Chapter 
10, “Core Mechanics”) or from other combinations of circumstances that prevent 
the player from winning or losing. If a player fails to pick up a critical item in an 
adventure game and then passes through a one-way door that prevents him from 
retrieving the item, he’s in a stalemate. He hasn’t lost the game, but he can’t win it 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

338 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
either. Well-designed games don’t let the player proceed without the item. Some 
don’t let players put items down once they have picked them up, just to help avoid 
this problem. Study your mechanics carefully to see if the game can ever enter a 
state that completely precludes victory but does not meet a loss condition. If it can, 
you should either change that state to a loss condition or—preferably—redesign the 
mechanics to prevent the game from ever getting into that state.
■ The game doesn’t ask the player to make critical decisions without adequate 
information. The ZX Spectrum game Monty on the Run by Gremlin Graphics 
required the player to choose at the beginning of the game exactly ﬁ ve items to 
take with her as she tried to escape her pursuers. Unfortunately, it gave her no clues 
about which items she needed; she could ﬁ nd out only by trial and error. Give play-
ers the information they need.
■ All the factual knowledge required to win the game should be contained 
within the game. Players should not have to do research outside the game world to 
win a game, with the sole exception of trivia games. Chapter 9 discusses this at 
greater length. 
■ The game should not require the player to meet challenges not normally 
presented in the game’s genre (such as a formal logic puzzle in a ﬂ ight simulator). 
If the game belongs to a hybrid genre, you must make this clear before the player 
starts to play.
Managing Difﬁ culty
Psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi observed that people performing tasks enter 
an enjoyable state of peak productivity, which he calls ﬂ ow, when (among other 
things) their abilities balance the difﬁ culty of the tasks they face. If the challenges 
are too difﬁ cult, people become anxious; if the challenges are too easy, people 
become bored (Csikszentmihalyi, 1991). Csikszentmihalyi’s observations apply to 
games as well as to other tasks. Balancing a game, then, includes managing the dif-
ﬁ culty of its challenges to try to keep the players within the ﬂ ow state—the point at 
which their abilities just match the problems they face. This provides another 
example of the player-centric approach: Your goal is not simply to set a level of dif-
ﬁ culty but to think about how to adjust that difﬁ culty to maximize the player’s 
enjoyment. See Figure 11.2 for an illustration.
Chapter 9, in the section “Skill, Stress, and Difﬁ culty” examined two factors, the 
intrinsic skill required (ISR) to overcome a challenge and the stress placed on the 
player by time pressure, that combine to form the absolute difﬁ culty of the chal-
lenge. The remainder of this section extends the discussion of difﬁ culty to take 
into account two additional factors, ultimately arriving at the idea of perceived difﬁ -
culty—the type that matters to the player. As the preceding section explained, the 
perceived difﬁ culty of a well-balanced game must remain within a certain range 
and not have sudden spikes or dips.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
339
 CHAPTER 11
Difficulty
Anxiety
Boredom
F L O W
Player Ability
Because game challenges fall into many extremely different domains—physical 
coordination, factual knowledge, formal logic, pattern recognition, and so forth—
there’s no way to compare difﬁ culty across these domains. Even within a given 
domain, such as factual knowledge challenges, it may be hard to decide when one 
challenge is more difﬁ cult than another; questions of fact that some audiences ﬁ nd 
hard are easy for other audiences. Most Americans would be unable to answer 
many factual knowledge questions about the history of Angola, and 8-year-olds 
would certainly struggle with complex logic puzzles. Consequently, the following 
discussion makes no reference to any audience or unit of measure.
Factors Outside the Designer’s Control
In managing the difﬁ culty of a game, you command a number of factors, but a few 
remain outside your knowledge or control. You cannot know how much time the 
player has already spent playing other games similar to yours—or, more accurately, 
facing challenges similar to those that you offer. This factor is called previous experi-
ence. (The experience the player gains while playing your game is called in-game 
experience.)
You also cannot know how much native talent the player brings to the game: hand-
eye coordination, reasoning faculties, and so on. As a result, we can’t include either 
previous experience or native talent in our calculation of perceived difﬁ culty. We 
look into these factors when we come to the question of difﬁ culty modes in the 
later section “Establishing Difﬁ culty Modes.”
Finally, in multiplayer games, the skill of the player’s opponents plays the greatest 
role in determining how hard it is to beat them, and you do not control that. 
FIGURE 11.2 
The balance 
between difﬁ culty 
and ability, producing 
Csikszentmihalyi’s 
idea of ﬂ ow


--- PAGE BREAK ---

340 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Consequently, you don’t have to put as much effort into managing difﬁ culty 
throughout the game, so long as the game is fair. You still have to set the difﬁ culty 
of individual challenges posed by the environment in a multiplayer game, however. 
The height of the basketball hoop and the size of the rim determine how hard it is 
to shoot a ball through the hoop in absolute terms, but how hard it is to win the 
game depends on the quality of the opposing team.
OFFERING CHEATS TO THE PLAYER
Many games try to account for differences in previous experience and native talent 
among the players by offering so-called cheats: hidden options that the player may use 
to gain an extra advantage. Cheats originally arose as a convenience feature for game 
testers, allowing them to jump ahead in the game, bypass certain challenges, and so on, 
so that they could go quickly to the part of the game they needed to test. Eventually 
designers realized that players could beneﬁ t from cheats too, and they began to leave the 
cheats as hidden features in the shipped version of the product. This practice is now so 
widespread that it has become standard.
In spite of its ubiquity, however, if your design depends on the use of cheats, your game 
is poorly balanced. If a player cannot get through a game without using a cheat, the 
game is too hard. Instead of offering a hidden cheat that the player must search the 
Internet to discover, simply build the cheat in as a normal feature of the game’s easiest 
difﬁ culty mode and leave it out of the harder modes.
Types of Difﬁ culty
Players care most about perceived difﬁ culty; what matters is how hard the player 
ﬁ nds surmounting a given challenge. To design a challenge at your target level of 
perceived difﬁ culty, you must take into account four factors: intrinsic skill required 
and stress, both introduced in Chapter 9, as well as power provided and in-game 
experience, deﬁ ned shortly. We’ll also examine absolute difﬁ culty and relative dif-
ﬁ culty, concepts that are helpful when you are trying to gauge in advance how 
difﬁ cult players will ﬁ nd the challenges you design for them.
ABSOLUTE DIFFICULTY
To judge the absolute difﬁ culty of a challenge, compare the amounts of intrinsic skill 
required to meet the challenges and the stress that the challenge imposes on a triv-
ial challenge of the same type. For instance, in an action game, a trivial enemy 
would stand still, could not harm the avatar, and could be killed with one punch. If 
you design another enemy that takes more effort to kill (because it has more health 
points), that moves around (requiring more intrinsic skill to hit), and that hits the 
avatar back (thereby placing the player under time pressure—stress—to kill the 
enemy before the enemy kills the avatar), you can be conﬁ dent you have designed 
NOTE The designer 
controls four key 
factors that create 
perceived difﬁ culty: 
intrinsic skill required, 
stress, power provided 
by the game, and 
in-game experience. 
The major factors the 
designer cannot control 
are previous experience 
and native talent. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
341
 CHAPTER 11
an enemy more difﬁ cult to defeat, in absolute terms, than the trivial enemy that 
established the baseline. In effect, the absolute difﬁ culty of a challenge equals the 
intrinsic skill required and the stress of the challenge compared to the trivial case.
You will ﬁ nd the concept of absolute difﬁ culty useful when you need to compare 
the difﬁ culty levels of different challenges. In general, if one enemy has twice as 
many health points as another, all other things being equal, it survives twice as 
long under assault, making it twice as hard to defeat.
RELATIVE DIFFICULTY AND POWER PROVIDED
You cannot determine how the player perceives the difﬁ culty of a challenge 
through absolute difﬁ culty alone. You must also take into account two more fac-
tors. The ﬁ rst is the amount of power that the game gives to the player to meet the 
challenge. Power provided measures, by means appropriate to the situation, the play-
er’s strength: the health and powers of his avatar, the size and makeup of his army, 
the performance characteristics of his racing car, or whatever factors apply. In the 
simple example described in the previous section, power provided would refer to 
the amount of damage the avatar can do when hitting the enemy and the avatar’s 
resistance to damage: the number of health points that he has to lose before dying. 
The relative difﬁ culty is the difﬁ culty of a challenge relative to the player’s power to 
meet that challenge. For example, in an RPG, a player playing a level 1 knight will 
ﬁ nd it much harder, in absolute terms, to defeat a large enemy than a small one. 
But a player playing a level 5 knight won’t ﬁ nd it nearly so hard to defeat that same 
large enemy because the game provides a level 5 knight with so much more power 
than it provides a level 1 knight.
If the power the game provides to the player doesn’t change throughout the game, 
then you may ignore this distinction between absolute and relative difﬁ culty. But 
most games include an upgrade progression whereby the player gains power as the 
game progresses because the new powers keep the player interested in the game and 
give her the feeling of accomplishing more. As a result, when level designers build 
challenges into the game world, they must also take into account the power pro-
vided to the player to meet those challenges. The level designers have to know, for 
example, that by the time the player reaches the fourth level, he will have earned 
three major weapon upgrades and a faster vehicle, so they set the difﬁ culty of the 
fourth level’s challenges relative to that level of power provided. To simplify man-
aging the difﬁ culty, many games don’t allow the player to carry powers over from 
level to level; instead, the level designers themselves set the amount of power pro-
vided separately for each level and take it into account accordingly as they devise 
challenges. In persistent worlds, in which each individual player has his own 
amount of power provided, earned through his earlier play, the game must either 
warn players in advance against trying a mission that is too hard or ﬂ atly exclude 
them from such missions.
NOTE Power pro-
vided is not related 
to native talent: It is 
a factor you control. 
In some games, the 
power provided may 
change through the 
action of positive
feedback.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

342 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
PERCEIVED DIFFICULTY AND IN-GAME EXPERIENCE
As they progress through a game, players learn to use the game’s user interface 
more efﬁ ciently, and they learn at an intuitive level how the core mechanics of the 
game work. In-game experience at meeting any particular type of challenge may be 
measured by the amount of time the player has already spent meeting similar chal-
lenges within your game. (Remember that you cannot know how much previous 
experience the player has playing other games.) The more in-game experience a 
player has, the easier he perceives a given type of challenge to be. Thus, when the 
level designers build a challenge into a level, they must take into account the play-
er’s amount of in-game experience with the same type of challenge. If the player 
already has a lot of in-game experience with challenges of that type, the level 
designers should consider raising the challenge’s absolute difﬁ culty to compensate.
The perceived difﬁ culty of a challenge—the difﬁ culty that the player actually senses, 
and the type we are most concerned with—consists of the relative difﬁ culty minus 
the player’s experience at meeting such challenges. Remembering that relative difﬁ -
culty is absolute difﬁ culty minus power provided, we can put all these factors 
together into a single equation such that
perceived difﬁ culty = absolute difﬁ culty - (power provided + in-game experience)
Note that there are no units of measurement for these variables, so if you want to 
compute actual values for them, you will have to ﬁ nd a way to measure their quan-
tities based on the challenges that you plan to include in your game. The equation 
serves more as a useful principle for you to understand than as a value you can 
really compute.
Creating a Difﬁ culty Progression
In a balanced game, the perceived difﬁ culty of challenges presented to the player 
either should not change or should rise, so the player feels that later challenges 
present greater difﬁ culty than those at the beginning. (If a game becomes easier to 
play, players will deﬁ nitely feel that the game is unbalanced.) In order to achieve 
this, you have to take into account the player’s increasing in-game experience and 
build in appropriate increases in absolute difﬁ culty. If you wish to, you can also 
build in increases in the power provided by the game. Figure 11.3 shows this pro-
gression graphically. Notice the gap between the absolute and relative levels of 
difﬁ culty. This gap represents power provided by the game to meet challenges, 
which widens steadily as the player gains power.
The gap between relative difﬁ culty and perceived difﬁ culty on the graph represents 
the player’s increasing in-game experience as she plays. At the beginning of the 
game, the perceived difﬁ culty exactly equals the relative difﬁ culty because the 
player has no in-game experience at all. As time goes on, her perception changes as 
she gets more practice.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
343
 CHAPTER 11
Difficulty
Time
Absolute
Difficulty
Relative
Difficulty
Perceived
Difficulty
Power
Provided to
Meet
Challenges
In-Game
Experience
the Player
Has Had
If the available power grows at exactly the same rate as the absolute difﬁ culty goes 
up, the relative difﬁ culty will be a ﬂ at line, as illustrated in Figure 11.4 (next page). 
In that case, a level 5 knight would ﬁ nd it exactly as hard to kill a level 5 troll in 
the middle of the game as a level 1 knight would ﬁ nd it to kill a level 1
troll at the beginning of the game. But relative difﬁ culty should not be a ﬂ at line 
because when you factor in the player’s increasing in-game experience, the per-
ceived difﬁ culty actually goes down—the game gets easier. Aim to increase the 
absolute difﬁ culty of the challenges somewhat faster than you increase the avail-
able power to meet them. The gap between absolute and relative difﬁ culty widens 
only slowly.
WHEN PERCEIVED DIFFICULTY SHOULD NOT CHANGE
The perceived difﬁ culty throughout the game should either remain ﬂ at or should rise. 
In most games, it rises. For some players, however, it should remain ﬂ at or rise only very 
slowly. Young children and casual gamers have a lower tolerance for frustration than 
older and more hardcore players. Mobility-impaired players may not get as much beneﬁ t 
from increasing experience as fully able players in games with physical coordination 
challenges. If you are making a game speciﬁ cally for these groups, try to keep the per-
ceived difﬁ culty level nearly ﬂ at throughout the course of the game.
TIP In a long game, 
relative difﬁ culty must 
increase over time to 
counteract the player’s 
growing in-game 
experience, or he will 
perceive the game as 
getting easier and 
easier. 
FIGURE 11.3
Absolute, relative, 
and perceived levels 
of difﬁ culty


--- PAGE BREAK ---

344 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Difficulty
Time
Absolute
Difficulty
Relative
Difficulty
Perceived
Difficulty
Power
Provided to
Meet
Challenges
In-Game
Experience
the Player
Has Had
Even if the perceived difﬁ culty of a game rises only slowly, you do want the player 
to feel he attains bigger and bigger accomplishments as he goes. To achieve this, 
you must take into account all the factors pertaining to difﬁ culty already discussed. 
Use the following guidelines:
■ Increase the absolute difﬁ culty of challenges over time.
■ Increase the power available to the player to meet those challenges at a some-
what lower rate. (See the later section “Understanding Positive Feedback.”)
■ Be sure the player doesn’t gain experience so fast that challenges start to feel as 
if they’re getting easier rather than harder. Space challenges so that their relative 
difﬁ culty increases slightly faster than the in-game experience increases.
■ Play-test your game to look for any dramatic spikes or dips in the perceived difﬁ -
culty of its challenges so you can iron them out. A sharp, unanticipated rise in the 
game’s difﬁ culty will discourage many players and may prevent them from ﬁ nish-
ing the game even if the difﬁ culty quickly falls again.
■ Start each game level at a perceived difﬁ culty somewhat lower than that at 
which the preceding level ended, and increase the difﬁ culty during the course of 
each level as well. Each game level should also take a little longer to play through 
and have a slightly steeper rate of difﬁ culty growth than the one before. A graph 
explains this process best; Figure 11.5 illustrates a game with only ﬁ ve levels. This 
FIGURE 11.4
If relative difﬁ culty 
is ﬂ at, perceived 
difﬁ culty goes down 
as the player gains 
experience. 
NOTE In a game 
with more than ﬁ ve 
levels, the rate of 
difﬁ culty should not 
increase as steeply as 
that shown in Figure 
11.5. Also note that the 
ﬁ gure doesn’t illustrat-
ing the pacing within 
a level, only the 
general progress of 
the whole game.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
345
 CHAPTER 11
sawtooth shape creates good pacing over the course of the game. Chapter 12, 
“General Principles of Level Design,” discusses pacing at greater length. 
Perceived Difficulty
Time
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
DESIGN RULE Don’t Jump Difﬁ culty from Level to Level
Do not introduce sudden difﬁ culty jumps between the end of one level and the beginning 
of the next. There is a good chance the player saved the game after completing the previ-
ous level and has not played it for some time, so she might have lost some of the beneﬁ t 
of her experience.
Establishing Difﬁ culty Modes
In creating a single-player game, you should allow the player to choose how difﬁ -
cult the game will be, typically with three options labeled easy, normal, and hard, 
or similar terms. When players make this choice, they’re playing in a difﬁ culty mode,
such as easy mode or normal mode. (Don’t confuse these with gameplay modes.)
Multiplayer games don’t always offer different difﬁ culty modes because in many 
multiplayer games the player’s skill determines how hard it is for others to beat her 
or for her to beat them. But in multiplayer games in which the environment itself 
sets challenges for the players, such as a road race, the players may want to choose 
the difﬁ culty of the environment’s challenges—to select easy, normal, or hard 
courses to race on, for example.
When you create a game that offers the player a choice of multiple difﬁ culty 
modes, in effect you promise that the perceived difﬁ culty of the game will never
go above a certain point throughout a game level. 
How you adjust the difﬁ culty of challenges for different modes depends on the 
challenges and on the genre of your game. In action and action-adventure games, 
FIGURE 11.5
A sawtooth difﬁ culty 
progression across 
multiple game levels


--- PAGE BREAK ---

346 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
for example, designers normally give the enemies more health, allow them to do 
more damage, and make them more numerous. Designers also sometimes adjust 
the AI of enemies and artiﬁ cial opponents, making them smarter or more aware of 
threats. Chapter 9 discusses how to adjust the absolute difﬁ culty of different kinds 
of challenges.
WHY OFFER DIFFICULTY MODES?
Offering multiple difﬁ culty modes allows the player to set the difﬁ culty of the game in 
keeping with the two factors you cannot know or control: the player’s previous experi-
ence with similar types of games and the player’s native talent. Although nobody buys a 
game speciﬁ cally because it offers multiple difﬁ culty modes, a great many people don’t
buy games that they think might be too hard for them to play. Including multiple difﬁ -
culty modes increases the market for your game by making it accessible to a broader 
range of players. In addition, difﬁ culty modes give the player better value for the money 
at comparatively little development cost. Once players complete the game in an easy 
mode, they might enjoy playing it again in a harder mode. If it has only one mode, 
they’re less likely to enjoy playing through it a second time.
Not all genres are suited to difﬁ culty modes, and some designers feel that they are an 
outdated way to handle the variation in the players’ native talent and previous experi-
ence. An alternative is to use techniques of dynamic difﬁ culty adjustment (DDA), also 
sometimes called adaptive difﬁ culty. (Dynamic difﬁ culty adjustment appears in a later 
sidebar.) Although it might be desirable to only use DDA in an ideal world, in practice not 
all teams have the resources to build and tune a DDA system. Furthermore, players like 
having difﬁ culty modes and are used to them—which is a good reason to offer them.
DESIGN RULE Easy Mode Means Easy!
Some games, usually those built by game developers who are also hardcore gamers, offer 
the player an easy mode that isn’t really easy at all. If you’re going to call it “Easy Mode,” 
it really should be easy for even an inexperienced player. Players choose Easy Mode for a 
reason; if they want a more challenging experience, they can choose a harder mode. Don’t 
assume that you know what “easy” is. Try your game out on some inexperienced players 
and see how they react, then tune your Easy Mode for them.
In some cases, you may not be able to adjust the difﬁ culty level of a challenge at 
all. With something like a static obstacle, such as a cliff the avatar must climb, the 
challenge is built into the shape of the cliff, and adjusting its difﬁ culty would mean 
redesigning the landscape on the ﬂ y. Instead, give the player an alternative route 
that avoids the cliff climb in the easiest mode, but lock off the easy route in the 
harder modes.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
347
 CHAPTER 11
DYNAMIC DIFFICULTY ADJUSTMENT
Over the years, game designers have made a number of efforts to create games that 
detect the player’s level of skill and adapt themselves to change the player’s experience 
accordingly. Several approaches have been tried:
• The ﬁ rst-person shooter game Max Payne automatically adjusts the strength of
enemies and the amount of aiming assistance provided to the player based on his
performance. The changes work to keep the player’s experience at an appropriate
level of difﬁ culty, but they are transparent to the user.
• Half-Life 2 checks the state of the avatar’s health and ammunition when he breaks 
open a crate in the game world, and adjusts the contents of the crate accordingly. If he
is healthy and well supplied, he might ﬁ nd little or nothing, but if he is short of one of 
these resources, he might ﬁ nd medical kits or spare ammunition.
• The racing game Burnout 2: Point of Impact automatically changes the performance of 
computer-controlled drivers to keep them near the player’s car regardless of how well or 
poorly she does. No matter what the skill level of the player, this approach ensures a 
close race.
• Crash Bandicoot, an action game, offers the player extra shields against attack if he 
fails to get through a certain section too many times in a row. Players ﬁ nd this mechanism 
rather obvious. Furthermore, rather than being a global system like Max Payne’s, it had 
to be implemented separately for each region of the game where it offered extra shields. 
• Madden NFL 09 gives the player a series of explicit tests in its “Virtual Training 
Center,” then adjusts the difﬁ culty of the gameplay in the real game based on his perfor-
mance in the tests.
• God of War, another action game, detects when the player is dying frequently and 
offers him the chance to play again in a lower difﬁ culty mode. In this case, the game 
doesn’t adapt its difﬁ culty; it simply offers the player the chance to choose an easier mode. 
Some players complain that they ﬁ nd this patronizing; presumably others ﬁ nd it a relief.
DDA systems such as those used in Max Payne and Burnout 2 are the subject of consider-
able debate within the game industry and for the moment remain experiments rather 
than standard industry techniques. Some designers believe that no automated system 
can accurately predict how hard a player wants his experience to be, so they should not 
even be tried. In fact, as with everything else in game development, there are tradeoffs. 
Good DDA systems are time-consuming to build and tune, but they can signiﬁ cantly 
enhance the player’s experience if done well.
continues on next page


--- PAGE BREAK ---

348 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
DYNAMIC DIFFICULTY ADJUSTMENT
continued
You should not try to implement a DDA system in a beginner-level project. Learn to build 
and tune games in the conventional way ﬁ rst. However, if you are a more advanced 
designer or you have been assigned the task of developing one, consider the following: 
Any DDA system requires two mechanics: a performance-evaluation system to measure 
how well the player is doing, and an adjustment mechanism to change the difﬁ culty of 
the challenges he faces. How you do this will naturally depend a great deal on the kinds 
of challenges you’re offering. 
• Don’t use DDA as a substitute for ordinary difﬁ culty modes that the player can set. 
Players like to have the freedom to limit the maximum difﬁ culty level of the game.
• Make it optional, a feature the player can accept or reject. DDA systems are often used 
in conjunction with player-settable difﬁ culty modes.
• Use it to make the game harder but not easier. It is generally simpler to make a game 
more difﬁ cult than to make it easier. To make a game easier under computer control, the 
software has to determine the reason for the player’s failure, which isn’t always clear or 
measurable. Making a game harder doesn’t depend as heavily on the computer’s under-
standing of the reasons for the player’s success.
• Never arbitrarily take something away from the player, especially something that he 
feels he’s earned. It’s OK to give the enemies more weapons; it’s not OK to take weapons 
away from the player.
• Keep it subtle—this is the most important advice of all. The best DDA systems are 
the ones the players never even notice. Max Payne is a good example; God of War is a 
bad one.
As long as your adaptive-difﬁ culty system remains an optional means of making the 
game extra challenging for the hardcore player, it will be less prone to the problems 
observed with such systems because the player cannot manipulate it to her advantage, 
and she can switch it off if it becomes a problem.
DDA is an advanced design topic, and there isn’t room to cover all its nuances here. You 
can read more about the subject in the Gamasutra article “Difﬁ culty Modes and Dynamic 
Difﬁ culty Adjustment” (Adams, 2008).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
349
 CHAPTER 11
Understanding Positive Feedback
Positive feedback occurs when a player’s achievement causes changes to the state of 
the game that make a subsequent achievement easier, which in turn makes further 
achievements easier still, and so on. The term does not refer to the effect of increas-
ing experience but to a phenomenon of the core mechanics that occurs even if the 
player’s performance does not improve with experience. The core mechanics often 
reward achievements with assets that the player can convert into power to make 
further achievements easier. Figure 11.6 shows a feedback relationship diagram.
Monopoly, as usual, provides a classic example. When a player achieves a monopoly 
by buying a group of related properties, the player may charge higher rents to any 
opponent who lands on these properties—the owner’s reward for the achievement. 
The player may then use the money to purchase more property and collect more 
monopolies, thus producing a better chance of earning still more money.
Some games feature an even closer relationship between achievement and power in 
which the player’s reward for achievement is power. The reward doesn’t come in an 
intermediate form, such as money, that must be converted into power by buying a 
weapon or a spell. Whichever side loses a piece in a game of chess then plays with a 
depleted force, so the player who takes the piece obtains more power relative to his 
opponent. In PvP games such as chess, achieving the lead often confers some 
advantage upon the leader that makes it easy for her to stay in the lead and difﬁ cult 
for the others to overtake her.
Not all games include positive feedback. If overcoming challenges does not produce 
a reward that the player can use to help him overcome further challenges, no feed-
back cycle exists. In a javelin competition, a good throw of the javelin does not 
produce additional power that inﬂ uences subsequent throws.
earns…
Achievement
Reward
Power
eases…
next…
can be traded 
for more…
FIGURE 11.6
The positive feedback 
relationship among 
achievements, 
rewards, and power 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

350 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Beneﬁ ts of Positive Feedback
Positive feedback can beneﬁ t your game in two ways:
■ Positive feedback discourages stalemate. A well-balanced PvP game should 
only rarely result in a stalemate, and PvE games should never end in stalemate. 
Positive feedback tends to bring games to an end because a player who takes a 
decided lead becomes unstoppable.
■ Positive feedback rewards success and provides that reward in a useful form 
rather than a purely cosmetic form, such as a higher score. Even though the per-
ceived difﬁ culty of challenges may increase, thus requiring the player to work 
harder nearer the end of the game, she still feels rewarded by a sense of power and 
growth at being able to do things she could not do at the beginning of the game. 
Because avatar growth is one of the key goals in role-playing games, the positive 
feedback cycle serves as the central design feature of the internal economy of com-
puter role-playing games.
Controlling Positive Feedback
Although positive feedback generally beneﬁ ts by helping bring a game to an appro-
priately timed end, especially in PvP games that involve direct conﬂ ict between the 
players, you must not allow positive feedback to operate so quickly that the game 
ends too soon or a player who falls behind never has any chance to catch up. Part 
of balancing your game will consist of adjusting your positive feedback cycle to pre-
vent these problems.
Here are six different ways of controlling the rate of positive feedback:
■ Don’t provide too much power as a reward for success. In chess, taking one
of the opponent’s pieces gives the player an added measure of power. In shogi 
(Japanese chess), the player can then add that piece to his own side, acquiring even 
more power. Introducing the piece directly would give the player too great an 
advantage; instead, it comes in as a weaker piece, which somewhat reduces the size 
of the reward. Similarly, in many war games, such as Warcraft, a player can destroy 
enemy factories, but he cannot capture them and use them to produce weapons for 
his own side. If he could do that, he would become unstoppable too quickly. (In 
real wars, armies often destroy their own production facilities and materiel to pre-
vent them falling into enemy hands for precisely this reason.)
■ Introduce negative feedback. Negative feedback associates a cost with achieve-
ment to counteract the beneﬁ t—a negative reward, in other words. You may do this 
explicitly or allow it to happen automatically as a function of the gameplay. In 
Dungeon Keeper, the player can convert enemy creatures to ﬁ ght for her own side, 
but once she does so, she has to provide food, money, and living space for them—
explicit costs associated with adding them to her army. In the pool game eight ball, 
the greater the lead a player has on his opponent, the more difﬁ cult it becomes to 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
351
 CHAPTER 11
sink shots because he has fewer balls to target on the table, and his opponent has 
more balls left to get in the way. Pool doesn’t include positive feedback to help the 
leader, so this negative feedback actually tends to keep games close.
■ Raise the absolute difﬁ culty level of challenges as the player proceeds. This 
approach applies primarily to PvE games such as role-playing games. As the player 
gains experience points and treasure through successful combat, he obtains more 
and more power through positive feedback. In order to continue to offer him 
meaningful challenges, increase the strength and numbers of the enemy. Defeating 
stronger enemies yields larger rewards, so the cycle continues. Near the end of the 
game, he ﬁ ghts enemies hundreds of times more difﬁ cult to beat—in absolute terms—
than those that he fought at the beginning, and this gives him a great sense of 
accomplishment. But because you have matched the absolute difﬁ culty of the chal-
lenges to the power you provide, the perceived difﬁ culty remains under control.
■ Allow collusion against the leader. In games with three or more players, you 
can write the rules in such a way that the other players can collaborate against the 
player in the lead. The collaborating forces may be sufﬁ cient to overcome the 
effects of positive feedback when the power of a single player might not be. 
Diplomacy encourages collusion—forming alliances is the main point of the game.
■ Deﬁ ne victory in terms unrelated to the feedback cycle. If you deﬁ ne the vic-
tory condition of your game explicitly in terms of player rewards, power, or success 
at achievements that make up parts of the positive feedback cycle, then positive 
feedback will hasten victory. But you can also deﬁ ne victory in other terms. Taking 
a piece in chess confers an advantage to whichever player took it, but the victory 
condition in chess requires the player to checkmate his opponent’s king, not to 
take the most pieces. Although a player may achieve the victory condition more 
easily with more pieces, it can also be useful to sacriﬁ ce a piece for strategic 
reasons.
■ Use the effects of chance to reduce the size of the player’s rewards. Role-
playing games do this to some degree by randomly varying the amount of loot that 
enemies yield to the player when they are defeated. By occasionally giving players a 
lower reward for their achievements, you slow down positive feedback.
Positive Feedback in Action
The set of graphs in Figure 11.7 illustrates the effects of positive feedback, or its 
absence, in a variety of circumstances. Each graph shows the state of a hypothetical 
game between two players, A and B, over time. When the curve passes above the 
center line and into A’s area, A leads; when it goes below the center, B leads. When 
the curve reaches the dotted line on one side or the other, the game ends and the 
player indicated wins.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

352
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
FIGURE 11.7 Graphs showing the effects of different adjustments to positive feedback
Consider the following observations about these graphs:
■ Graph 1 represents a game, such as a sprint foot race, in which no feedback loop 
exists to augment player power. A, the faster runner, wins.
■ Graph 2’s game lasts only a short time. B takes the lead and wins almost
immediately. A’s few efforts to catch up allow A to gain ground temporarily but 
ultimately fail. This graph describes an unfair game, badly balanced in favor of B.
■ Graph 3 depicts a stalemate, with neither side ever getting far enough ahead for 
positive feedback to take hold and lead to victory. The game probably involves little 
positive feedback (or possibly none) and closely matched competitors.
■ Graph 4 shows a game with fairly balanced rules but one in which positive feed-
back operates too quickly. B goes ahead, then A, then B again, and then A goes 
ahead just enough for a dramatic positive feedback cycle to make A unstoppable.
■ Graph 5 indicates a game with a feedback cycle such that being in the lead 
becomes a profound disadvantage, the effect of powerful negative feedback. A
and B gain substantial leads and then alternately fall substantially behind so that 
the graph shows wild swings. Mario Kart and other multiplayer local games not 
intended to be taken too seriously sometimes use this mechanism.
■ Graph 6 shows an ideal game progression: The lead changes hands and both 
players have a good chance of winning the game for a while, but eventually A’s 
superior play places her in a leading position that she never yields. The action of 
positive feedback ensures that B, the less-skilled player, cannot catch up, although 
B has a pretty good chance for about two-thirds of the game and perhaps could 
have won if A’s attention had wavered; that is, the outcome wasn’t a foregone 
conclusion.
A
B
1. Sprint foot race
(no feedback)
A
B
2. Unbalanced rules in
B’s favor
A
B
3. Stalemate (insufficient
feedback to produce victory)
A
B
4. Balanced rules, but
feedback operates too fast
A
B
5. Wild swings in the lead
(powerful negative feedback)
A
B
6. Ideal game progression
(lead changes hands, better
player wins eventually)


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAME BALANCING 
353
 CHAPTER 11
Other Balance Considerations
This section addresses two undesirable qualities of unbalanced games, stagnation 
and triviality, that you should seek to avoid.
Avoiding Stagnation
Stagnation occurs in a PvE game when the game leaves the player in a position
in which he simply does not know what to do next; he believes that he is stuck. 
(Don’t confuse this with a stalemate, a situation in which the players cannot go
on no matter what.) Stagnation tends to be a result of a design that doesn’t give
the player enough information to proceed. First-person shooters that require a 
player to run all over the place trying to ﬁ nd the hidden switch that opens the
level exit, after having killed all her opponents, stagnate. Once the player kills all 
the opponents, the level exit should be obvious.
Stagnation seldom occurs in PvP games because such games almost always put the 
competitors in direct conﬂ ict with one another and provide them with means to 
act against each other’s forces. Stagnation occasionally happens when one player’s 
forces are so reduced that there is little he can do. But because he usually loses the 
game soon afterward, this doesn’t represent a serious stagnation problem. The most 
common complaint about stagnation in PvP games occurs in scenarios where the 
victory condition requires a player to destroy all enemy units, and one last enemy 
unit (often not even a combat unit) remains hidden in an obscure location. You 
can avoid this by setting a different victory condition, such as to destroy the ene-
my’s headquarters instead of all his units.
Stagnation can be difﬁ cult to avoid in a sprawling action-adventure with so many 
different combinations and conﬁ gurations that you can’t reliably anticipate what 
the player may or may not try. However, you can still give the players information 
as they progress:
■ Tackle stagnation passively by hiding in plain sight clues about how to proceed.
■ Tackle stagnation actively by having the game detect when the player wanders 
around aimlessly; make the game provide a few gentle nudges to guide her in the 
right direction.
Never let the player feel bewildered. If he has to resort to outside assistance in order 
to proceed—whether by cheating, reading a strategy guide, or looking up the 
answers on the web—your game contains a design ﬂ aw.
Avoiding Trivialities
Players don’t want to be bogged down in minutiae when they can be directing the 
big decisions. Forcing the player to decide where to store the gold when she must 
try to build an army and plan a campaign strategy merely distracts her with 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

354 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
uninteresting details. It moves the player out of the ﬂ ow state and into boredom. 
Likewise, any gameplay decision that has no real effect on the game world, or any 
decision that requires the player to pick from a slate of options that includes only 
one reasonable option, is trivial. Let the computer handle it. (This doesn’t apply to 
non-gameplay decisions, such as self-expressive acts—choosing a team color may 
not affect the gameplay, but the player should still be allowed to do it.)
Sid Meier’s Alpha Centauri handles this magniﬁ cently. In this game, the player can 
choose to handle every decision from overall control of the planet all the way 
down to production and direction of individual units, or she can let a computer-
controlled manager control her bases and her units. This accommodates players 
who want to micromanage every aspect of the game as well as those interested
only in grand strategy. This is a superior design because it gives the player a choice. 
Other games force the player to do all the micromanagement, whether she wants
to or not.
Triviality can add to the player’s enjoyment when you use it well and not too often. 
Consider a cops and robbers game. The player’s avatar, a police ofﬁ cer, patrols the 
city as usual, on the lookout for crime, when he spots a group of suspicious-looking 
characters on the corner. He stops the car, and they immediately run down an 
alleyway and vanish; the player won’t meet these particular characters again, and 
they do not form part of the game’s story. These characters provide local color 
rather than part of the gameplay. If you don’t lead the player too far down the 
wrong path, you can use such trivial interaction to give the impression that there
is more to the city than meets the eye.
Design to Make Tuning Easy
In the later stages of game development, you will spend a great deal of time tweak-
ing and tuning your game to improve its balance and remove any dominant 
strategies or difﬁ culty spikes that may have crept in. Here you’ll ﬁ nd a few sugges-
tions to make this process easier.
Chapter 10 explains that you should seek to generalize when you can, to create a 
set of mechanics that apply to a wide variety of entities rather than creating sepa-
rate mechanics for each entity. So, for example, in any game that involves combat, 
try to create one set of mechanics that governs combat between units regardless of 
what types of units the combat involves. Not only does this simplify the program-
ming—the developers can concentrate on implementing the core mechanics and 
then adding entities on top of those core rules, rather than coding each entity sepa-
rately—it also simpliﬁ es tuning the design.
If each entity has its own mechanics, the mechanics for each entity must be tuned 
separately, which could potentially cause balance problems. If you use generalized 
mechanics as described in “Look for Patterns, Then Generalize” in Chapter 10, 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

