358 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
nature of the challenges offered? Will it make the enemies tougher or weaker, 
smarter or more stupid? Will it add or remove challenges entirely?
11. Does the game include positive feedback? If so, how will you control it to avoid 
runaway victory for the ﬁ rst player who gets ahead? A time delay? Negative feed-
back? A random factor?
12. How will the player know what to do next? What features does the game include 
to prevent stagnation?
13. To what degree is the player required to micromanage the game? Is the player 
obliged to look after trivia? Are mechanisms available for the player to delegate 
some of these responsibilities to an automated process? If so, can the player be
conﬁ dent the automated process will make intelligent choices? 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 CHAPTER 12
General Principles 
of Level Design
If you have ever found yourself admiring the environment of a game or enjoying 
the way the game’s challenges keep you guessing, you are appreciating the work of 
that game’s level designer. The level designer creates not only the space in which 
the game takes place—its furnishings and backgrounds—but also the player’s 
moment-by-moment experience of the game, and much of its emotional context. 
Successful level designers draw on fundamental design principles that apply to any 
kind of game, such as ensuring the player always knows his short-term goals and 
the consequences of risks, as well as design principles speciﬁ c to the type of game 
being designed. Level designers work closely with the game designer to make sure 
layouts are appropriate for the storyline and to achieve the atmosphere and pacing 
required to keep players engaged in the game world. Level design will not be a 
quick and easy process if you do it right. This chapter will identify 11 steps that the 
level designer takes, from initial handoff to user testing. The ﬁ nal section details 
problems to avoid in the level design process, including the key directive to never 
lose sight of your audience. 
What Is Level Design?
Chapter 2, “Design Components and Processes,” described level design as the pro-
cess of constructing the experience that will be offered directly to the player, using 
components provided by the game designer. Note that the terms game designer and 
level designer are not interchangeable but refer to separate roles that, on larger devel-
opment teams, are almost always played by different members of the team. In the 
rest of this book, the word you means the reader as game designer, but in this chapter 
only, you indicates the reader as level designer.
Level designers create the following essential parts of the player’s experience:
■ The space in which the game takes place. If the game includes a simulated 
space, as most do, then level design includes creating that space using a 2D or 3D 
modeling tool. While game designers determine what kinds of things will be in the 
game world, level designers determine precisely what features will be in each level of 
the game world and where these features will be. Level designers take the game 
designer’s general plans for levels and make them speciﬁ c and concrete.
359
CHAPTER 12


--- PAGE BREAK ---

360 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ The initial conditions of the level, including the state of various changeable 
features (Is the drawbridge initially up or down?), the number of artiﬁ cial opponents 
the player faces, the amounts of any resources that the player controls at the begin-
ning of the level, and the location of resources that may be found in the landscape.
■ The set of challenges the player will face within the level. Many games offer 
challenges in a linear sequence; if so, level designers determine what that sequence 
will be, construct a suitable space, and place the challenges within it. In other 
games, the challenges may be approached in a number of different possible 
sequences or any order at all; see the later sections “Layouts” and “Progression
and Pacing” for further discussion.
■ The termination conditions of the level, ordinarily characterized in terms of 
victory and/or loss. In many games, levels can only be won but not lost, and in a 
few, such as the default mode in SimCity, levels can only be lost and never won.
■ The interplay between the gameplay and the game’s story, if any. The writer 
of the story must work closely with the level designer to interweave gameplay and 
narrative events.
■ The aesthetics and mood of the level. Whereas the game designer and art 
director specify the overall tone of a level and artists create the speciﬁ c models and 
textures, level designers take the general speciﬁ cations and decide how to implement 
those plans. If the plan says, “Level 13 will be a scary haunted house,” the level 
designers decide what kind of a house and how to make it feel scary and haunted.
Level designers normally construct all these parts using tools created speciﬁ cally 
for the purpose. Some games, including Warcraft III and Half-Life 2, actually ship 
their level design tools along with the game, so players can expand and customize 
the game world; if you own one of these games, you can practice level design by 
using those tools.
Level design could easily be the subject of an entire book. However, this chapter 
concentrates on introducing the general principles and the process of level design.
Key Design Principles
Two types of design principles will help you design a level: universal level design prin-
ciples aimed at designing levels in any kind of game, and genre-speciﬁ c level design 
principles, which focus on design issues speciﬁ c to the different genres. This section 
addresses each of these in turn.
Universal Level Design Principles
Barbarossa: The [Pirate’s] Code is more what you’d call “guidelines” than actual rules.
—PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN: THE CURSE OF THE BLACK PEARL


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LEVEL DESIGN 
361
 CHAPTER 12
Level designers have for some time tried to deﬁ ne a set of principles to guide the 
level design process so that new games will avoid the errors of older ones. 
Considerable debate surrounds this issue, because not everyone agrees on which, if 
any, principle is truly universal. Examining the important principles constitutes a 
valuable exercise in any case, so we present a brief list here. Some principles apply 
as much to game design generally as they do speciﬁ cally to level design, but 
because the level designer constructs the play environment and sets the challenges, 
she will be the one who puts these principles into practice.
■ Make the early levels of a game tutorial levels. The entire section “Tutorial 
Levels” is devoted to this extremely important topic later in this chapter.
■ Vary the pacing of the level. This is also critically important. The “Progression 
and Pacing” section addresses this later.
■ When the player surmounts a challenge that consumes his resources, pro-
vide more resources. This may seem obvious, but you might be surprised at how 
many games fail to do it. This, too, is addressed in “Progression and Pacing.”
■ Avoid conceptual non sequiturs. Unless your level is either intentionally sur-
real or meant to be funny, you shouldn’t build elements that make no sense, such 
as rooms accessible only via ventilation shafts. Even more important, don’t put 
dangers or rewards in places in which no sane person could possibly expect to ﬁ nd 
them. See the section “Avoid Conceptual Non Sequiturs” later in the chapter.
■ Clearly inform the player of his short-term goals. At any given time, the 
player is working to achieve a whole hierarchy of challenges, from the overall vic-
tory condition of the game down to the problem occupying his attention (How do I 
get across this chasm?) at the immediate moment. (Chapter 9, “Gameplay,” dis-
cusses the hierarchy of challenges at greater length.) While you do not always have 
to tell the player exactly what he needs to do to win (he may have to discover the 
long-term goal through exploration or observation), you should never leave him 
wondering what to do next; the current or next short-term goal should be obvious.
■ Be clear about risks, rewards, and the consequences of decisions. When fac-
ing a challenge, the player should always have some idea of the beneﬁ ts of success 
and the price of failure or, if the player has to make a decision, the likely conse-
quences associated with his options. Old video games used to implement a learn by 
dying approach, which gave players no means of knowing what elements of the 
game world were dangerous and what weren’t, so the avatars died repeatedly as the 
players learned. Industry professionals now consider this extremely bad design 
practice. Although the player should not necessarily know every detail of what con-
sequences his decisions will produce, he should be able to make a reasonable guess 
based on the context in which you present the decision. If you give him a door-
knob, it should open the door. It may also release a giant killer robo-camel into the 
room, but it should open the door ﬁ rst.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

362 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ Reward the player for skill, imagination, intelligence, and dedication. These 
four qualities distinguish a good player, and good players deserve to be rewarded. 
You may create rewards in many forms: powerups and other resources, shortcuts 
through the level, secret levels, minigames, cut-scenes and other narrative material, 
or simple praise. Players like to be told when they’ve done a good job.
■ Reward in a large way, punish in a small way, or to use an old adage, you 
catch more ﬂ ies with honey than vinegar. The hope of success motivates players 
more than the fear of failure does. If a game repeatedly smacks them down hard, 
players will become discouraged and abandon the game with a feeling that they’re 
being abused. Don’t forget that the duty to empathize is one of the obligations of 
player-centric game design: Your primary objective is to give players an enjoyable 
experience. Build more rewards into your level than punishments.
■ The foreground takes precedence over the background. Design the visual 
appearance of your level so that the player’s attention is naturally drawn to his 
immediate surroundings. Don’t make the background so complex that it distracts 
the player. Spend more of your machine’s limited resources (polygons, memory, 
CPU time) on foreground objects than on background ones. 
■ The purpose of an artiﬁ cial opponent is to put up a good ﬁ ght and then 
lose. Design your level so that the player will get better and better at overcoming 
the challenges until he succeeds at all of them. In a multiplayer competitive game, 
the skill and luck of the players decide who wins, but in a single-player game, you 
always want the player to win eventually, and it’s up to you to make sure that hap-
pens. An unbeatable level is a badly designed level.
■ Implement multiple difﬁ culty settings if possible. Make your game accessible 
to a wider audience by allowing them to switch the difﬁ culty of your game to easy, 
normal, or hard settings. In games with an internal economy, you should be able to 
tweak the numbers to adjust the difﬁ culty to accommodate the player’s preference; 
Chapter 11, “Game Balancing,” addresses this in more detail. 
THE 400 PROJECT
In 2001, veteran game designers Hal Barwood and Noah Falstein began assembling a list 
of design rules for video games, hoping eventually to compile a list of as many as 400 of 
them. So far, Barwood and Falstein’s 400 Project has gathered more than 100 rules from 
fellow designers; these represent the combined wisdom of many people. Rather than 
outright commandments, these are tools to guide your own creative work, as a ruler 
guides a pencil. Some of the rules conﬂ ict with others, and it will be up to you to decide 
when one rule is more important than another. You should download the rules and take 
them to heart as you design your game and the levels within it. You can ﬁ nd The 400 
Project at www.ﬁ nitearts.com/400P/400project.htm.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LEVEL DESIGN 
363
 CHAPTER 12
Genre-Speciﬁ c Level Design Principles
Some principles of level design apply only to games within speciﬁ c genres. Since 
there isn’t room to present a comprehensive list of principles speciﬁ c to each genre, 
this section offers one highly important genre-speciﬁ c principle for each genre cov-
ered in Part Two, “The Genres of Games,” of this book. For more details on each 
genre, see the relevant chapter in Part Two.
ACTION GAMES
Vary the pace. Action games put more stress on the player than any other genre 
does, so the universal principle vary the pace applies more strongly to action games 
than to other genres; that is why it is the most important genre-speciﬁ c principle as 
well. Players must be able to rest, both physically and mentally, between bouts of 
high-speed action.
STRATEGY GAMES
Reward planning. Strategic thinking means planning—anticipating an opponent’s 
moves and preparing a defense, as well as planning attacks and considering an 
opponent’s possible defensive moves. Design levels that reward planning. Give 
players defensible locations to build in and advantageous positions to attack from, 
but let the players discover these places for themselves.
ROLE-PLAYING GAMES
Offer opportunities for character growth and player self-expression. Character 
growth is a major player goal in any RPG; some players consider it even more 
important than victory. Every level should provide opportunities to achieve charac-
ter growth by whatever means the game rewards—combat, puzzle-solving, trade, 
and so on. RPGs also entertain by allowing players to express themselves; that is, to 
role play. Every level should include opportunities for the player to make decisions 
that reﬂ ect the player’s persona in the game.
SPORTS GAMES
Verisimilitude is vital. Sports games, while not ordinarily broken into levels in the 
usual sense, consist of individual matches played in different stadiums or courses 
with different teams or athletes, so you can think of each match played as a level. 
Level designers design the stadiums and sometimes the teams and athletes. More 
than in any other genre, players of sports games value a close relationship between 
the video game and the real world. The simulation of match play must be com-
pletely convincing; try to model each team and each stadium as closely as possible 
to the real thing—which includes not only appearances but the performance char-
acteristics of the athletes and the coaching strategies of the teams.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

364 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
VEHICLE SIMULATIONS
Reward skillful maneuvering. All vehicle simulations offer steering a vehicle as 
the primary player activity and steering well, often in adverse circumstances, as the 
primary challenge. Construct levels that test the player’s skill at maneuvering his 
vehicle and reward him for his prowess. Other challenges, such as shooting or 
exploring, should be secondary.
CONSTRUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SIMULATIONS
Offer an interesting variety of initial conditions and goals. Most construction 
and management simulations (CMS) start the player with an empty space and let 
her build whatever she likes within the constraints of the game’s internal economy. 
In such games, you won’t need to do much level design. However, a CMS can also 
offer the player an existing or partial construction and let her continue working 
from there, often with a goal to achieve within a certain time limit. These are nor-
mally called scenarios rather than levels, the difference being that a scenario, unlike 
a level, consists of a self-contained situation unrelated to any of the other scenar-
ios. Typically the game allows players to try the scenarios in any order, and the 
gameplay (though not the goal) tends to be identical in each. Because you cannot 
alter the gameplay, scenario design becomes a matter of offering an interesting 
variety of initial conditions and goals. SimCity 3000 Unlimited comes with 13 sce-
narios, from reuniting East and West Berlin to preparing for a World Cup soccer 
match in Seoul.
ADVENTURE GAMES
Construct challenges that harmonize with their locations and the story.
Adventure games offer much of their entertainment through exploration and puz-
zle-solving. Designers set different chapters of an adventure game in different 
locations or landscapes to add novelty and interest to the experience. (A chapter is 
the adventure game equivalent of a level.) Create challenges that harmonize with 
the current level and with the current events in the story. In a room full of machin-
ery, the challenges should involve machines; on a farm, the challenges should 
involve farm animals or implements. This principle applies to some extent to any 
game, but because story is so important in adventure games, the principle is espe-
cially important for that genre.
ARTIFICIAL LIFE GAMES
Create many interaction opportunities for the creatures in their environment.
Much of the enjoyment in playing an artiﬁ cial life (A-life) game comes from watch-
ing the simulated creatures in the game and giving them things to do within their 
environment. The level designer for an A-life game, then, needs to create interac-
tion opportunities. The game should also offer many opportunities for the player 
to interact with the creatures as well, but generally the game designer, not the level 
designer, speciﬁ es these.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LEVEL DESIGN 
365
 CHAPTER 12
PUZZLE GAMES
Give the player time to think. Puzzle-solving is problem-solving, and it knows
no timetable. Few players enjoy being forced to solve puzzles under time pressure. 
(Tetris, a famous exception, at least lets the player pause the game.) You may not be 
able to offer the player multiple difﬁ culty levels due to the complexity of balancing 
puzzle games—for further discussion of this issue, see Chapter 20, “Artiﬁ cial Life 
and Puzzle Games”—which is another reason that time to think becomes impor-
tant. Either create puzzles that give the player complete freedom to think things 
through before acting or allow him to pause the game and study the screen for a 
while.
Layouts
For games that involve travel, especially avatar-based games, the layout of the space 
signiﬁ cantly affects the player’s perception of the experience. Over the years, a few 
common patterns have emerged, which this section introduces in simpliﬁ ed form. 
You should not hesitate to create any layout that your game needs.
Open Layouts
In an open layout, the player beneﬁ ts from almost entirely unconstrained move-
ment. An open layout corresponds to the outdoors, with an avatar in principle free 
to wander in any direction at any time. Even levels with open layouts, though, may 
include a few small regions that cannot be entered without difﬁ culty or can be 
entered by only a single path (such as passing through a door into a building). War 
games make extensive use of open layouts, Battleﬁ eld 1942 being a particularly suc-
cessful example. Role-playing games offer open layouts while the player goes 
adventuring outdoors, but they typically switch to network or combination layouts 
(described later) when the party goes indoors or underground.
Linear Layouts
A linear layout requires the player to experience the game’s spaces in a ﬁ xed 
sequence with no side corridors or branches. It does not mean that the spaces are 
actually arranged in a line (see Figure 12.1). A player following a linear path can 
move only to the next area or to the previous area and does not have to make any 
decisions about where to go next. A game in which all levels use linear layouts is 
often said to be on rails because, like a train on a track, the traveler goes wherever 
the predeﬁ ned route takes her. Ordinarily, the player has no reason to go backward 
in a linear layout unless she forgot to pick up something that she needs. Linear lay-
outs often require players to pass through one-way doors that actually prevent 
them from going back, so long as they have collected everything they need to go 
on. Be sure you don’t lock a player out of a region that contains an item essential to 
her later progress—an elementary level design error.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

366 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Linear layouts naturally work well with linear stories; if your game features such a 
story, you might consider such a layout. See Chapter 7, “Storytelling and Narrative,” 
for more on linear stories.
Traditional for side-scrolling action games and rail-shooters, the linear layout is 
otherwise uncommon nowadays. Today’s designers tend to favor the parallel 
layout.
Parallel Layouts
A parallel layout—a modern variant 
of the linear layout—resembles a
railroad switchyard with lots of
parallel tracks and the means for
the player to switch from one track
to another at intervals. The player 
passes through the level from one 
end to another but may take a variety 
of paths to get there. See Figure 12.2
for a much-simpliﬁ ed illustration.
Even though the parallel layout does 
not require players to pass through 
every available path, most players 
search them all anyway if the game 
lets them do so. One path may offer a 
greater risk and therefore a greater 
reward, while another path may give 
the player greater insights into the 
storyline. You can easily construct a 
FIGURE 12.1 
A level with a linear 
layout
FIGURE 12.2 
A level with a parallel 
layout


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LEVEL DESIGN 
367
 CHAPTER 12
parallel layout to reﬂ ect a foldback story structure. (See Chapter 7 for a discussion 
of story structures.)
You can also use parallel paths to provide shortcuts that let a player bypass particu-
larly difﬁ cult challenges that lie on the more obvious path. If you do so, you may 
want to hide the entrance to the shortcut so only a particularly dedicated explorer 
will ﬁ nd it. When you create a hidden entrance, you must provide some clue, how-
ever subtle, that it is there. Otherwise, ﬁ nding it becomes a trial-and-error 
challenge, a sign of bad design. The original Wolfenstein 3D contained hidden 
rooms accessible only through wall panels that looked exactly like the rest of the 
wall, which forced players to check every single wall panel in the entire level to see 
which might conceal a hidden room.
Ring Layouts
In a ring layout, the path returns to its starting point, although you may include 
shortcuts that cut off a portion of the journey (see Figure 12.3). Designers mainly 
use ring layouts for racing games, in which players pass through the same space a 
number of times, facing challenges from the environment and each other along 
the way. Shortcuts require less time but should be proportionately more difﬁ cult 
than the regular route; balancing this will be a big part of the level designer’s job.
Rings do not necessarily look like circles. Oval tracks or twisting road-racing tracks 
qualify as rings.
Network Layouts
Spaces in a network layout connect to other spaces in a variety of ways. Figure 12.4
shows a simple example. A large network poses a considerable exploration 
FIGURE 12.3 
A level with a ring 
layout


--- PAGE BREAK ---

368 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
challenge; just learning the way around 
made up a signiﬁ cant part of the gameplay 
in old text adventure games. Modern 
graphical games that implement three-
dimensional spaces usually present 
architecturally appropriate and logical 
networks (going downstairs from the 
ground ﬂ oor of a building leads to the 
basement, for instance) but still offer 
plenty of opportunities to create enjoy-
able exploration challenges. See the 
section “Exploration Challenges” in 
Chapter 9 for further discussion.
A network layout gives the player consid-
erable freedom about what path to take, 
so you will ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to tell a story 
that requires a particular sequence of 
events in a network layout. This doesn’t mean that you can’t tell stories, only that 
your stories have to tolerate the player experiencing events in any sequence. To 
enforce some sequence, use a combination layout, described in the later section 
“Combinations of Layouts.”
In a network with a small number of major spaces, every space may be connected 
to every other space for maximum freedom of movement. This arrangement poses 
little exploration challenge to the player but makes an ideal ﬁ ghting ground for 
deathmatch contests in games such as Quake because there are no choke points. 
Enemies may enter and exit in several directions, which prevents a player from 
guarding one particular location indeﬁ nitely.
Hub-and-Spoke Layouts
In the hub-and-spoke layout, the player begins in a central hub that ordinarily 
doesn’t present signiﬁ cant challenges or dangers. As such, it serves as a place of 
comfort or safety, a base to which to return. To explore the rest of the world, the 
player follows a linear path out from the hub and then returns back to the hub on 
the same path (see Figure 12.5). The return journey either should be quick—because 
the player covers old ground during the return—or should offer new opportunities 
for gameplay and new rewards as the player comes back. Normally you would also 
put a major challenge and a major reward at the outer end of the spoke.
This layout gives the player some choice about where he goes, which many players 
appreciate. You need not offer the player access to all the spokes at the beginning of 
the level; to make sure that the player doesn’t try the harder challenges too soon, 
you can lock off some areas until the player tries the easier challenges available in 
other spokes. Note that if you unlock the spokes only one at a time, you effectively 
change the hub-and-spoke layout into a linear layout.
FIGURE 12.4 
A level with a simple network layout


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LEVEL DESIGN 
369
 CHAPTER 12
The Spyro the Dragon games use a hub-and-spoke plan. The games include several 
hubs, called homeworlds, each of which is the center of its level. Various spokes lead 
off from the hubs to areas with different themes.
Combinations of Layouts
Many layouts combine aspects of each type of layout, providing, for instance, net-
worked spaces to accomplish tasks within a larger linear framework. The layout in 
Figure 12.6 corresponds to the story structure of many large RPGs, which tend to 
offer one major story arc and a large number of subplots or quests. Adventure 
games quite often use a combination structure too, letting players do considerable 
exploration in one area before moving on to another. Note the similarities with 
Figure 19.7 in Chapter 19, “Adventure Games.”
FIGURE 12.5 
The hub-and-spoke 
layout
FIGURE 12.6 
A combined linear and 
networked layout


--- PAGE BREAK ---

370 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Expanding on the Principles of Level Design
This section looks at a few particularly important issues in the list of universal 
design principles: atmosphere, pacing, and tutorial levels.
Atmosphere
The art director and lead game designer decide on the overall look of a game; the 
artists build the models; and the audio engineers create the sound effects. But it’s 
up to the level designer to assemble all this material into a speciﬁ c level in such a 
way that it’s aesthetically coherent and creates the appropriate mood. A level 
designer does what in movies would be four or ﬁ ve jobs—set designer, lighting 
designer, special effects designer, Foley editor, and even cinematographer—because 
a level designer must look at the game world the way the player sees it, through the 
lens of the game’s virtual camera.
As you work to establish the atmosphere of your game, you will use all of the fol-
lowing tools:
■ Lighting. The placement and orientation of the lights in a level can create a 
sunny day, a moonlit night, or a dark alley. Soft morning light ﬁ ltering in through 
a window creates a sense of warmth and well-being, whereas the odd glowing col-
ored lights of a machine room evoke a sense of danger. The yellow of a sodium 
vapor street lamp or the harsh ﬂ uorescent lights of an ofﬁ ce and any other lighting 
you choose must work with other aesthetic choices you make to set the mood of a 
level. What you choose not to light is just as important as what you choose to light.
■ Color palette. Just as the color palette of the avatar’s clothes reﬂ ects her charac-
ter, the color palette of the level reﬂ ects its mood. The color palette of the level will 
emerge from a combination of the original colors of the objects you place in it (cre-
ated by the artists under neutral lighting conditions) plus the lighting that you add. 
Notice how television commercials use color to telegraph an emotion, calm you 
down, get you excited, or keep you interested in watching. Do some research on 
color, and you will ﬁ nd many ways to create an effect in your level or elicit a partic-
ular response from the player.
■ Weather and atmospheric effects. Fog, rain, snow, and wind all create distinct 
impressions. So many games take place in indoor spaces that we sometimes forget 
the importance of weather to our moods. Dark, tumbling skies presage a storm and 
make us instinctively react with “Find shelter!” even in a video game. Fog creates 
mystery, while strong winds suggest instability and disturbances to come.
■ Special visual effects. When weapons recoil or screeching tires create smoke, 
when magic spells produce colored sparks or blood splashes across a wall, you’re 
seeing visual effects. You can startle players, discomﬁ t them, amuse them, or 
reward them, all with visual effects.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LEVEL DESIGN 
371
 CHAPTER 12
■ Music. You won’t write the music unless you’re also a musician, but you may 
well choose the music of your level in conjunction with your game’s audio director. 
The rhythm of the music helps to set the pace, and its timbre and key help to set 
the mood. Generally, but not always, music remains consistent throughout the 
level, part of its overall tone.
■ Ambient audio. Like music, ambient audio contributes to the overall mood of a 
level. Notice how golf games use the sounds of birds singing and crickets chirping 
to suggest the peaceful outdoor tranquility of a golf course. The ambient audio can 
also vary with place and time, which tells the player something about where he is 
and helps him to orient himself. Great steam engines churning create a feeling of 
power and danger; owls hooting and foxes crying tell us it’s nighttime; the hubbub 
of talk and regular cries of vendors put us in a market square.
■ Special audio effects. Audio effects naturally do for the ears what visual effects 
do for the eyes, and in some respects, provide even more important information. 
From inside a car, you can’t see the tires losing their grip on the road, but the 
squealing sound tells you you’re on the edge of danger—you’re pushing the vehicle 
to its limits.
Progression and Pacing
A large video game—one designed to be played for more than an hour, say—
is almost always divided into a number of levels. If you want the player to 
experience those levels in a sequence, they should exhibit progression of some kind: 
changes from level to level that represent growth in some form, or narrative 
advancement, or both. 
The pacing of a level refers to the frequency at which the player encounters individ-
ual challenges. A fast pace creates stress, offering challenges at a rapid rate while 
giving the player no opportunity to relax. (Chapter 9 deﬁ nes stress and discusses 
the relationship between stress and difﬁ culty.) A slow pace offers challenges at a slow 
rate and permits the player to take his time about addressing them.
This section of the chapter discusses both progression and pacing, and how to 
design them properly.
DESIGNING THE PROGRESSION
Games obviously need to change from level to level, but how should they change? 
Designer Mike Lopez has written a useful article on the subject in his “Gameplay 
Design Fundamentals” column for the Gamasutra webzine (Lopez, 2006). He iden-
tiﬁ es ﬁ ve game features that should exhibit progression throughout the game; these 
serve us as a starting point: 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

372 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ Mechanics. Lopez uses this term to refer both to the core mechanics of the 
game and the actions available to the player. This book organizes these concepts 
differently, so we’ll look at core mechanics here and actions later. Generally speak-
ing, the core mechanics should become richer as the game goes along. In the early 
levels, especially the tutorial levels, the internal economy of the game should be 
easy for the player to learn. Later, the mechanics can become more intricate, as in 
games like the Civilization series. Many games also exhibit economic growth through-
out the game, so the player is dealing with larger and larger quantities of resources—
money, hit points, horsepower, or whatever the game deems to be of value.
■ Experience duration. Except for the occasional atypical level (see the later sec-
tion “Make Atypical Levels Optional”), it should take more and more time to play 
through each subsequent level. This rule is not absolute, but generally speaking, 
levels later in the game should be longer than those earlier in the game.
■ Ancillary rewards and environmental progression. Ancillary rewards are unre-
lated to the gameplay: cut-scenes, trophies, unlockable content, and so on. (When 
the player gets to the end of Silent Hill 3, she earns the right to dress Heather, the 
avatar character, in new clothes and play the game again wearing them. This has no 
effect on the gameplay.) By environmental progression Lopez means enjoyable changes 
in the landscape of the game world, which makes sense when the game involves 
travel. Both of these provide novelty, one of the ways that video games entertain.
■ Practical gameplay rewards. These are rewards that directly inﬂ uence the play-
er’s future gameplay: new vehicles in driving games; new gear or skills in role-playing
games; new moves or characters in ﬁ ghting games; new technology in strategy 
games, and so on.
■ Difﬁ culty. Generally speaking, the perceived difﬁ culty of the game should go 
up, remaining ﬂ at only for games for small children and some casual games. 
Chapter 11 dealt with this issue extensively.
In addition to Lopez’s list of features, you may wish to consider a few more:
■ Actions available to the player. Lopez lumped these together with mechanics, 
but they aren’t quite the same. A game can possess core mechanics that don’t 
change much from level to level, yet still offer players new moves or other activities 
to perform as the game goes along. This is particularly noticeable in platform 
games. It’s always a good idea to introduce new actions through a series of tutorial 
levels so that players can become skilled with one before learning the next one.
■ Story progression. As your player progresses through the game, he should also 
progress through the story, if it has one. Exactly how this happens depends on a 
number of design decisions you must make: whether the plot is linear or not, and 
what mechanism causes the plot to advance. Chapter 7 addresses these details.
■ Character growth. Video game characters often become more powerful through 
practical gameplay rewards, and sometimes they become more visually interesting 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LEVEL DESIGN 
373
 CHAPTER 12
through ancillary rewards such as new clothing. But you can also make them grow 
in a literary sense: become more mature, well-rounded people. A character who 
doesn’t grow, especially over the course of several games, eventually begins to seem 
like a cartoon character with no emotional depth.
It will be easiest to implement these features if you organize your game into a
number of discrete levels, each of which contains its own environment, starting 
conditions, victory condition, and so on. However, levels are naturally rather artiﬁ -
cial. If you want to offer a strongly storylike experience, you may prefer to avoid 
having breaks between one level and the next, and try to create an entirely seam-
less experience. Half-Life is a famous example. 
DESIGNING THE PACING
The pace you choose for your level will depend to a considerable extent on the 
genre of the game you’re creating; players expect a faster- or slower-paced game 
depending upon the genre. The fastest-paced games of all, the old 2D side-scrolling 
or top-scrolling shooters, required players to move the joystick and bang the ﬁ re 
button continuously just to survive. Multiplayer deathmatch shooters such as Quake
and its kin represent the modern equivalent. (Stealth games such as the Rainbow Six
series, which involve careful planning, often move at a slow pace except for a brief 
wild ﬂ urry when the enemy comes into view.) Adventure games use the slowest 
pace because much of the activity consists of interactive dialog (generally a story 
action rather than an action the player takes to surmount a challenge), exploration 
without much effort, and puzzle solving in which the players can take as long as 
they like. Play a variety of games and study their pacing. Chapter 13, “Action 
Games,” discusses pacing extensively because it is so important in that genre.
CLASSIC ARCADE PACING
In arcade games, especially old ones such as Space Invaders, the pace at which the 
player faces challenges becomes faster and faster as each level progresses. If the player 
succeeds in beating the level—destroying all the invading aliens—he gets a few sec-
onds of rest before the next level begins. The next level offers identical challenges, but it 
starts at a faster pace than the previous level started and ends at a faster pace than the 
previous level ended. The pace of Space Invaders increases both within each level and 
from level to level until it overwhelms the player and he loses the game. He cannot win; 
he can only hope to get a high score.
This classic arcade pacing explains how arcade games used to make their money. This 
scenario is now considered a bit old-fashioned and inappropriate for console and PC 
games because they don’t need to make the player lose to force him to put more money 
in the machine. However, with the continuing popularity of retro gaming, classic arcade 
pacing remains common in simple web-based games such as Collapse!


--- PAGE BREAK ---

374 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
VARY THE PACING
As a general principle, the pacing of a level in any game, especially a game with 
physical challenges, should alternate between fast and slow periods, just as the 
tempo of movements in a symphony or the levels of excitement in an action movie 
vary. Players need moments to rest, both physically and mentally, and on the 
whole, the faster the pace of the level, the more important rest becomes. A particu-
larly stressful challenge should be followed by a brief period with no challenges at 
all and then by easier challenges that gradually ramp up to more stressful ones 
again. This also gives the player a chance to savor the pleasant emotions that 
accompany success.
Varying the pace not only gives the player a rest from physical challenges, it also 
produces a more balanced game. If overcoming a challenge requires spending a 
resource (ammunition or health or the like), then the more the player spends on a 
given challenge, the weaker and more vulnerable he is afterward. In his weakened 
state, he should not face another demanding challenge immediately. You should 
also make fresh supplies available to him immediately after he surmounts a chal-
lenge that costs him a lot of resources, as Chapter 11 explained. In shooter games, 
these traditionally take the form of boxes of ammunition and medical kits for 
restoring health, stored in an area immediately beyond a large group of enemies.
In role-playing games, enemies drop valuable resources when killed, thus helping 
to replenish the player’s supply.
PACING IN THE LORD OF THE RINGS
For a wonderful example of varied pacing from literature, read The Lord of the Rings.
Almost every major adventure or threat the Fellowship experiences in the ﬁ rst two vol-
umes is followed by a period of rest and refreshment to heal wounds and in particular to 
replenish food supplies. The hobbits ﬂ ee the Black Riders and take refuge with Farmer 
Maggot. They are caught in the Old Forest and rescued by Tom Bombadil. After the attack 
at Weathertop, they ﬁ nd shelter in Rivendell. After losing Gandalf in the Mines of Moria, 
they ﬁ nd succor in Lórien, and so on. This change of pace not only creates emotional 
variety for the reader, allowing her to enjoy the beauty and warmth of the heroes’ places 
of shelter after the terrors of their journey, but it also makes the story more credible. No 
one can carry six months’ worth of food on his back, so the supplies had to come from 
somewhere.
The Da Vinci Code, notwithstanding its ﬁ nancial success, is less credible in this regard. 
Involved in almost nonstop action from start to ﬁ nish, the heroes never seem to need 
any sleep.
You can vary the pacing in a variety of ways: by creating an area free of challenges 
in which the player can simply explore; by creating an area that contains only low-
stress challenges; or by making the player’s avatar temporarily invulnerable or 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LEVEL DESIGN 
375
 CHAPTER 12
particularly strong as a reward for successfully overcoming a demanding challenge. 
You can also deliver a bit of the story through narrative: Watching a cut-scene, for 
example, gives the player a moment to relax.
You will ﬁ nd it easiest to vary the pacing in games that involve avatar travel 
through a linear space, because you can control the sequence in which the player 
confronts challenges. Games that give the player freedom to explore at will give 
you less control. In genres that use multipresent interaction models rather than 
avatar- or party-based ones, you may have little control at all. For example, in a 
real-time strategy game, the pacing depends to a large degree on the player’s own 
style of play. Those who attack aggressively experience a faster pace than those who 
slowly build up huge armies before attacking.
OVERALL PACING
Although the pacing of a level should vary from time to time (depending on the 
genre), the overall pacing of the level should either remain steady or become more 
rapid as the player nears the end. A longstanding tradition in action games, and 
many other genres as well, calls for the inclusion of a boss to defeat at the end of 
the level: a particularly difﬁ cult challenge. Victory, and the end of the level, reward 
the player for defeating the boss, and this sometimes includes a cache of resources 
or treasure as well. Bosses, although something of a cliché, ﬁ t neatly into games 
with a Hero’s Journey story structure. Chapter 13 discusses bosses in greater detail.
Levels should not, in general, get easier and easier as they go along. If the player 
does well, positive feedback may come into play to make the game easier, and you 
will need to design the level, or the core mechanics, to reduce that effect. Chapter 
11 discusses positive feedback at length, including various means of limiting it.
Tutorial Levels
Years ago, video games shipped with large manuals that explained how to play the 
games. Designers had no other way to teach the player because the distribution 
media (cartridges and ﬂ oppy disks) couldn’t hold enough data to spare any room 
for tutorial levels. Nowadays, however, all games should be designed so that the 
player can start playing immediately. Games still use manuals, mostly in electronic 
form, but for detailed reference information rather than instructions.
Instead of instructions, games offer tutorial levels—early levels that teach the player 
how to play. Every commercial game except the simplest ones should include one 
or more tutorial levels. Although tutorial levels require more time and effort to 
build than a manual does to write, tutorial levels have the tremendous advantage 
that they let the player learn in a hands-on fashion. Players learn physical activi-
ties, such as how the control devices function in the game, far more quickly if they 
can try the actions for themselves.
TIP If your game 
is complex enough 
to need a manual, 
be sure to make the 
manual available for 
download from a web 
site or page dedicated 
to the game. Players 
lose manuals.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

376 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
A tutorial level is not simply an easy level or a short level. A tutorial level should be 
a scripted or partially scripted experience that explains the game’s user interface, 
key challenges, and actions to the player. Use voiceover narration, text superim-
posed on the screen, or a special mentor character to explain things to the player.
As you design one or more tutorial levels for your game, consider these key 
principles:
■ Introduce the game’s features in an orderly sequence, starting with the most 
general and most often used features and proceeding to the more specialized and 
rarely used ones. Your tutorial should introduce each individual action that the 
game permits, but it need not discuss combinations of actions and what effects 
they may have. The players can work that out for themselves.
■ Don’t make all the game’s features available at once. It will only confuse the 
player if he happens to select, by accident, a maneuver that you haven’t yet intro-
duced, which produces an effect on the screen that the player doesn’t understand. 
Disable features until the tutorial introduces them.
■ If the interface is complex, as interfaces tend to be in many war games and con-
struction and management simulations, introduce the information over two or 
three tutorial levels.
■ Highlight user interface elements that appear on the screen with an arrow or a 
colored glow whenever your explanatory text or helpful guide character refers to 
them. Don’t just say where these items appear on the screen and make the player 
look for them.
■ Let the player go back and try things again as often as he wants, without any 
penalty for failure. All the costs of making a mistake that you might put into the 
ordinary game world should be switched off in the tutorial levels.
DESIGN RULE Make Tutorial Levels Optional
Make the tutorial levels optional. Experienced players may not need them and will be irri-
tated by being forced to go through them. (America’s Army violated this rule, largely 
because of the game’s function as a representation of the U.S. Army. The developers 
wanted to make the point that not just anybody would be allowed into the army, so the 
tutorial levels symbolized Basic Training in the real army. America’s Army is not a pure 
entertainment product, however.)
The Level Design Process
Now that you have learned the general principles of level design, let’s turn to the 
process. Level design takes place during the elaboration stage of game design and, 
TIP If you discover 
that players are often 
uncertain about how 
to play, establish a 
Frequently Asked 
Questions (FAQ) web 
page for your game. 
Ideally, however, you 
will design the game 
so well that there won’t 
be any frequently 
asked questions!


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LEVEL DESIGN 
377
 CHAPTER 12
like the overall game design, is an iterative process. At points during the procedure, 
the level designers should show the work-in-progress to other members of the team 
for analysis and commentary. Early input from artists, programmers, and other 
designers prevents you from wasting time on overly complex levels, asking for fea-
tures the programmers cannot implement, or making demands for artwork that the 
artists don’t have time to meet.
At the 2004 Computer Game Technology Conference in Toronto, Canada, level 
designers Rick Knowles and Joseph Ganetakos of Pseudo Interactive presented an 
excellent lecture simply entitled “Level Design” (Knowles and Ganetakos, 2004). 
They described the 11-stage process by which their company builds levels, which is 
summarized here. The following sections assume that the development teams con-
sist of game designers, artists, programmers, and sound designers, as well as you: 
the level designer.
Throughout the discussion of this process, you will notice a strong emphasis on the 
relationship between the level designer and the art team, and less emphasis on the 
relationship between the level designer and the audio or programming teams. The 
reason for this is that level designers build prototype artwork that the art team 
then uses as a blueprint from which to build ﬁ nal artwork that will actually go into 
the game. This requires that the level designers hand off their prototype to the art 
team and receive the ﬁ nal artwork back from the art team at particular stages in 
the process. The relationship with the programmers and the audio team is less 
sharply deﬁ ned. Level designers request special features from these groups, and the 
project manager determines when and how that work gets done, but generally it 
doesn’t involve handing off material to the audio or programming teams and 
receiving material back from them in the same way. Your relationship with the
programmers and audio people is just as important as your relationship with the 
artists, but your interactions with them may be less formally scheduled.
A Note on Duties and Terminology
The nature of a level designer’s job varies considerably depending on both the 
genre of the game and the technology that implements it. A few years ago, level 
designers were not expected to possess either art or programming skills. As the size 
and complexity of games has increased, so has the size and complexity of the level 
designer’s job. In modern 3D games, level designers often use 3D modeling tools to 
construct temporary—and sometimes even ﬁ nal—artwork to go into a game. (The 
term model refers to a three-dimensional geometric structure that depicts a single 
thing, such as a human, vehicle, tree, or the underlying landscape of a level.) Also, 
games now often include scripting engines that allow level designers to write small 
programs, or scripts, that control some aspects of the behavior of the level during 
play. Scripting engines normally implement scripting languages less powerful than 
the programming language used by the programmers, but the scripting language 
will be sufﬁ cient for deﬁ ning the behavior of automated traps, doors, and other 
special events that may occur in the level. There isn’t room in this book to teach 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

378 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
you the skills you need to use such tools, but you can ﬁ nd many resources for 
learning to use them on the Internet and at colleges and universities.
For simplicity’s sake, this section assumes that you are creating levels for a game 
that uses a 3D graphics engine to display a 3D game world. If you are making a 2D 
game, where it refers to models, think in terms of their 2D equivalents: sprites (2D 
art and animation) for movable objects and the background (a 2D painting, often 
made up of interchangeable rectangular tiles) for the landscape.
Design to Level Design Handoff
In the ﬁ rst stage, the game designers will tell you in a general way what they want 
for the level: its setting, mood, key gameplay activities, and events. You should 
then generate a list of features you want to appear in the level:
■ Events that can be triggered by player action
■ Props (objects that will be present in the level)
■ Nonplayer characters (NPCs)
At this point you also create a rough overview map of the level, showing how the 
landscape varies and what props and NPCs will be in which areas. See Figure 12.7
for an example from an unproduced driving game by Pseudo Interactive, set on 
islands inhabited by dinosaurs.
FIGURE 12.7 
Rough level sketch for 
a driving game show-
ing key features. Image 
courtesy Pseudo 
Interactive. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LEVEL DESIGN 
379
 CHAPTER 12
Planning Phase
Armed with the list and sketch created in the ﬁ rst stage, you now start to plan the 
level in detail. Use pencil and paper to work out the sequence of events: both what 
you expect the player(s) to do and how the game will respond. Begin to document 
your decisions in the following key areas: gameplay, art, performance, and code 
requirements.
GAMEPLAY
As you plan the gameplay for your level, you will need to consider all the following 
issues:
■ Layout (discussed extensively in the “Layouts” section earlier). Where can the 
player-controlled characters (avatar, party, or units) go and where can they not go? 
What paths can they use to get there? Many parts of your level may be cosmetic: 
The player can see them but cannot reach them.
■ Areas devoted to major challenges. Which areas carry strategic importance? 
Which will offer the biggest challenges? If the game involves combat, where would 
you like it to occur?
■ Pacing. How will the intensity of action vary throughout the level? Where will 
the key events and the rest periods occur?
■ Termination conditions. How does the player win or lose the level?
■ Resource placements. Are depots of weapons, health points, powerups, or any 
other resources hidden in the environment? Where? What resources, and how 
much?
■ Player start and end points. Do the player-controlled characters begin the level 
at one or more speciﬁ c locations? Where? Do the characters end at one or more 
locations? Where?
■ NPC positions and spawn points. If NPCs—whether enemies, friends, or neu-
trals—appear in the level, where are they initially positioned? Can they suddenly 
appear in the level at a speciﬁ c location or spawn point during play? Where?
■ Elevations. How much vertical movement does the level permit, and how does 
that affect play? Higher elevations naturally allow the player to see farther in ﬁ rst- 
and third-person perspectives; will this cause problems or constitute a positive 
feature of your level?
■ Secret areas. Do you plan to incorporate hidden areas or secret shortcuts? Where 
will they be, and what clues will be available to suggest they might be present?
■ Special event issues. What special events, unique to this level, can occur? 
Where will they occur? What will set them off? How do the special events reﬂ ect 
the setting and tone of the level?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

380 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ Landmarks. How does the player ﬁ nd her way around? How can she tell where 
she is? Establishing major landmarks will help her out.
■ Destruction. Can any part of the level be destroyed or its landscape radically 
altered? Where does this happen and what causes it? How does it affect the game-
play? Does it have the potential to introduce anomalies, such as enemies who 
wander off the edge of the world and never return?
■ Storytelling. How does the sequence of events the player experiences integrate 
with the game’s story? Which events are dramatically meaningful and which are 
not? Where and when do you want cut-scenes or other narrative events to occur?
■ Save points and checkpoints. Does the level include save points or check-
points? Where? In games in which the player fails frequently and has to reload, 
positioning the save points is a critically important part of balancing the game.
ART
In the art planning phase, you determine the scope of your level and decide how 
much artwork it will need. Scope refers to the magnitude and complexity of the 
level, both in terms of the number of objects and characters that it contains and 
the special events that it includes. You can make a serious error by choosing too 
large a scope, because if you overload your art staff, you may never get the level
ﬁ nished at all. See “Get the Scope Right” near the end of this chapter. 
You already have your sketch and a general idea of what the environment will be 
like, whether on the sea ﬂ oor, in outer space, or inside an anthill. First decide on 
the scale of the level: How big will this level be in the game world’s units of mea-
sure? This will help you to determine just how many other features the level needs. 
In almost every genre, if you’ve balanced the challenges correctly, the size of the 
level is directly proportional to the length of time that it takes the player to play 
through that level, so the scale you choose will, in a rough way, determine how 
much gameplay you can offer.
Next, start thinking about the kinds of objects that should be present in the level. 
Do research at the library or on the Internet for visual reference material to give 
you inspiration. Count the number of unique types of props that the level will 
require and plan in a general way where to put them. Certain generic items such
as streetlights (or the infamous crates in ﬁ rst-person shooters) can simply be dupli-
cated, but natural objects such as trees and boulders should come in several types, 
and the art team will need to know this. Try to avoid including too many identical 
objects in a level; it destroys realism.
Create a list of textures that the level will probably need. In an ofﬁ ce, you may 
need tiles for the ﬂ oor coverings, wood or metal for the desks, fabric for the chairs, 
and so on. Some ofﬁ ces may be streamlined, with severe geometric shapes, whereas 
others may be ornate, featuring a Louis XIV desk and antique chairs.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LEVEL DESIGN 
381
 CHAPTER 12
Decide on the visual appearance of any special effects that the artists will have to 
implement. It may take a while for the artists to come up with the visuals for a 
never-before-seen eruption of semisentient magma at zero gravity, so you need to 
plan ahead.
PERFORMANCE
You normally think of performance as the programmers’ problem, but it’s up to the 
level designer not to build a world that bogs down the machine. You will need to sit 
down with the programmers and set some boundaries. How complex can the 
geometry be? How far into the distance will the graphics engine be able to render 
objects? How many autonomously moving units or creatures can the game support 
at one time? Know your machine’s limitations as you plan your level.
CODE
Finally, as part of the planning process, identify speciﬁ c requests that you intend to 
make of the programmers for features unique to this level. These may take the form 
of special events (sometimes called gags) that require coding, unique NPCs who 
appear only in this level but need their own behavior model and artiﬁ cial intelli-
gence, or special development tools you may require in order to build and test the 
level effectively. The more of these special coding problems you identify during 
planning and can discuss with the programmers in advance, the more likely that 
implementation will go smoothly.
Working through these steps results in an initial plan for the level. Don’t expect 
the numbers and details in this plan to exactly match what you end up with in
the ﬁ nished level, but working out in advance as much as you can will ensure a 
smoother design process. Charging in without a plan and making it up as you go 
along creates more problems in the long run.
Prototyping
In this stage, you will build a prototype of the level. Much of this work will consist of 
using a 3D modeling tool to construct temporary models of the landscape and objects 
that can appear within it. The models you create will not end up in the game but 
will serve as blueprints from which the art team will create the ﬁ nal artwork.
The prototyping phase requires that at least part of the game engine be running so 
that you can load the model into it and test it. Your prototype should include such 
features as:
■ The basic geometry (physical shape) of the game world created in a 3D modeling 
tool. If it’s a 2D world, the prototype should show the layout of the 2D landscape.
■ Temporary textures to place on the geometry to give it a surface. These will 
eventually be replaced by ﬁ nal textures created by the artists.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

382 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ Temporary models of props (trees, furniture, buildings, and so on) and NPCs 
that will appear in the level, so you can put them where they belong in the 
landscape.
■ Paths planned for AI-driven NPCs—where they travel within the level.
■ A lighting design for the level.
■ The locations of trigger points for key events. Placing these triggers and docu-
menting what sets them off is referred to as rigging.
In some cases, you may be able to use ﬁ nal audio effects in your prototype; that is, 
the sound effects that will actually end up in the game. If those are not yet avail-
able from the audio team, use temporary sound effects and note that they will need 
to be replaced later.
Level Review
At this point, you have a working prototype of the level; if the programmers have 
the game engine running, you should be able to play your level in a rudimentary 
way. Hold a level review, inviting members of the design, art, programming, audio, 
and testing teams to get their feedback. Each should examine your prototype for 
potential problems that may come up in his own ﬁ eld when he is working on the 
real thing. The issues that the level review should address include these:
■ Scale. Is the level the right size? Will it take too much or too little time to play 
through?
■ Pacing. Does the ﬂ ow of events feel right?
■ Placement of objects and triggers. Are things where they need to be to make 
the level play smoothly and produce the experience you want?
■ Performance issues. Is the level too complicated for the machine’s processor to 
handle? The programmers should be able to ﬂ ag any potential problems.
■ Other code issues. Does the level call for software that represents a problem for 
the programmers? For example, a unique NPC that appears only in this level still 
needs its own AI; will this be an issue?
■ Aesthetics. Is the level attractive and enjoyable to inhabit? Because the proto-
type uses temporary geometry and textures, a certain amount of imagination will 
be called for here.
Level Reﬁ nement and Lock-Down
After the level review, take the feedback you’ve received and reﬁ ne the prototype, 
correcting any problems and implementing any new decisions made in the course 
of the review. This can require any amount of work from tuning a few numbers to 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LEVEL DESIGN 
383
 CHAPTER 12
scrapping the entire design and starting over from scratch. When you think you’ve 
got it right, hold another review and make another reﬁ nement pass. Continue this 
process until everyone agrees (or the person in charge agrees) that the level is ready 
to go into full production.
At this point, lock the level design. Once a level is designated as locked, no additions 
or changes may be made except if grave problems are discovered. This corresponds 
to the lock-down that occurs in overall game design at the end of the concept stage. 
If you don’t treat the level as locked, you could go on tuning and tweaking it for-
ever, stretching out the development time and running up the budget.
Level Design to Art Handoff
With the level locked, it’s time to hand off your prototype and all your design work 
to the artists who will use it as a blueprint to build the geometry, animations, and 
textures that will end up in the real game. The artists will need all your ﬁ les, as 
well as a detailed list that explains each ﬁ le. Your job includes making this list; you 
cannot simply give them a directory dump and leave them to ﬁ gure it out. If they 
don’t already know about your design from the level reviews, you should sit down 
with the artists and give them a thorough brieﬁ ng not only on how everything 
looks in the level, but where everything should be and how everything works. From 
this information, the art director will create a task list to construct all the content 
the level requires: models, textures, animations, special visual effects, and so on.
If your prototype has been relying on placeholder audio, at this point you will also 
need to provide details to the audio team about what the level will need in the way 
of ﬁ nal audio. Notify the programmers about any special code that is required for the 
level at this point so they can have it ready for the content integration stage. (Content
refers to the non-software part of the game: artwork, audio, movies, and text.)
First Art and Rigging Pass
The project now enters the ﬁ rst art and rigging pass, during which the art team 
builds the real artwork and rigging. You may be working on other levels at the 
same time, but you should also stay in close touch with the art team because they 
will undoubtedly have questions. It may also be your responsibility to incorporate 
the content they create into the software, to make sure that it all works.
Art to Level Design Handoff and Review
When the art team ﬁ nishes the ﬁ nal artwork, the artists hand all their work back to 
you, and you should conduct another review. This will highlight any problems or 
errors with the artwork that need correcting.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

384 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Content Integration
At this point, you will assemble all the assets into the completed (but not yet 
tested) level—artwork, new code required by the level, audio, and any remaining 
tweaks to the lighting. You’ll also adjust any remaining issues with the rigging, by 
repositioning characters, effects, and triggers as necessary.
Bug Fixing
Test the level at this point, looking for bugs in the code and mistakes in the con-
tent. This will be another iterative process, working back and forth between the art, 
audio, and code teams and yourself. After ﬁ nishing your own testing, you hand the 
level off to the quality assurance (QA) department for formal testing.
User Testing and Tuning
In the last stage, QA will create a test plan for the level and begin formal testing, 
known as alpha testing. Their testing will ordinarily be more thorough and strict 
than the testing you’ve done; it will also ﬁ nd things that you missed because of 
your overfamiliarity with the material. As in your own testing, they’ll work in an 
iterative process with the various teams involved, including reporting the bugs in 
the rigging and gameplay mechanics that you need to ﬁ x. When QA considers the 
level to be thoroughly tested, they may make it available for beta testing (testing by 
end-users).
Pitfalls of Level Design
This chapter ends with a discussion of some important mistakes to avoid—classic 
errors of level design that, unfortunately, some designers continue to make.
Get the Scope Right
The single most common error made by inexperienced level designers is to try to 
build something too big. (They almost never try to build something too small.) 
Everyone would love to make an epic such as a Final Fantasy game, but such games 
require huge production teams, giant budgets, and multiyear development cycles. 
And even among experienced professionals, epic projects often run late and go 
over budget.
You must design within the resources of your team, your budget, and the time you 
have available. Scope, you should remember, refers not only to the size and com-
plexity of the landscape but to the number of props, NPCs, and special events in 
the level. In order not to undertake an unrealistically large level, you must make 
lists of these things during the planning stage before you actually start 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LEVEL DESIGN 
385
 CHAPTER 12
constructing the prototype. The process of making these lists may surprise you by 
showing you just how much work goes into making even a relatively small level.
Before you choose a scope for your level, determine how much time and staff you 
have available, taking into account any vacations and holidays that may be coming 
up. Then assume that half of your team will be out sick for a week at some point 
during the development process—it’s entirely possible. Now think again about the 
scope. How many models can your team build in a day? How quickly can you 
detect an error, correct it, and test it again? Choose a level size that you and your 
team can manage. If you make a level too small, it’s not easy to enlarge it, but at 
least you won’t have the art team killing themselves to create all the content. If you 
make a level too big and ﬁ nd that there isn’t time to complete everything, you’ll 
have to either deliver a sparse, unﬁ nished level or scramble to cut things out, which 
will almost certainly harm your level’s balance and pacing.
Avoid Conceptual Non Sequiturs
At the beginning of the ﬁ rst level of James Bond: Tomorrow Never Dies, the player, in 
the persona of James Bond, sneaks into an enemy military outpost armed only with 
a pistol and faces numerous Russian guards; how many, he doesn’t know. If he 
blows up some of the oil drums scattered somewhat randomly outside the outpost, 
he will ﬁ nd medical kits hidden inside, which he can use later to restore his health 
when wounded.
Hiding medical kits inside oil drums belongs to a class of design errors, usually 
made at the level design stage, called conceptual non sequiturs—game features that 
make no sense. No sane person would think of looking in an oil drum to see if a 
medical kit might be hidden within. Furthermore, any thinking player would rea-
son that if he’s trying to sneak into an enemy military installation armed only with 
a pistol, causing a loud explosion right outside is not a good idea; several dozen 
people will come running to see what made the noise. He would further assume 
that any medical kit that was inside an oil drum when it blew up wouldn’t be good 
for much afterward. Consequently, a reasonable player wouldn’t blow up the oil 
drum and wouldn’t get the beneﬁ t of the medical kit. In other words, the game 
punishes players for using their brains. It’s simply poor design.
James Bond: Tomorrow Never Dies made the mistake of copying a 20-year-old car-
toon-game mechanic—resources hidden in odd places—into a realistic game. A 
realistic game assumes that players can count on certain similarities between the 
real world and the game world (oil drums store oil, not medical kits; explosions 
destroy things rather than reveal things). No ﬂ ight simulator bothers to explain 
gravity, for the same reason. The player of a realistic game expects the assumptions 
he makes in the real world to be valid in the game world. By violating these expec-
tations with a conceptual non sequitur, James Bond: Tomorrow Never Dies became 
considerably harder for all but an experienced gamer who already knew the con-
ventions of cartoon-style video games.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

386 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
In short, avoid conceptual non sequiturs in realistic games. They discourage new 
players and make your game unnecessarily hard without making it more fun. 
Remember the principle that level designers should reward players for using their 
intelligence, not punish them for it.
Make Atypical Levels Optional
Level designers naturally like to vary the content of their levels, and it is good 
design practice to make creative use of the game’s features or to set your levels in 
different environments to provide the novelty that players like.
Still, you should not create wildly atypical levels and force the player to play them 
in order to get through the game. Level designers sometimes create a level ﬁ lled 
with only one kind of challenge—an action game level consisting of nothing but 
platform jumps, say, with no enemies to ﬁ ght or treasure to ﬁ nd. Others like to take 
away some of the actions that a player uses routinely on other levels and force her 
to make do with a limited subset of actions for the duration. Some have created lev-
els that borrow from a different genre entirely: a real-time strategy game level in 
which both sides control exactly one unit, thus turning the level into a strange sort 
of action game.
There are two reasons not to make these kinds of levels obligatory. First, it breaks 
the player’s suspension of disbelief to be suddenly confronted with a situation that 
would never occur according to the rules of the game world as the player has 
already learned them. Second, it may actually make the game unwinnable for some 
players. If you create a level ﬁ lled with only one kind of challenge, then a player 
who happens to be terrible at that kind of challenge—but who reasonably expected 
to make it through the game by being good at other kinds of challenges—might 
not be able to ﬁ nish the game at all, stymied by one atypical level. And there may 
be many players who don’t ﬁ nd that challenge as exciting as you do, who will ﬁ nd 
an entire level of it boring.
You shouldn’t avoid making atypical levels at all; they can be a lot of fun. But make 
them optional—hidden levels the player can unlock through excellent play or side 
missions for extra points.
Don’t Show the Player Everything at Once
As they say in theater, “Always leave them wanting more.” This advice applies to 
the overall progression of the game, so both game designers and level designers 
need to be aware of it. If your players have faced every challenge, seen every envi-
ronment, and used every action that you have to offer—all in a single level—then 
the rest of the game will be old hat for them. You have nothing further to offer but 
variations on a set of play mechanics and game worlds that they already know 
everything about. Let your game grow from level to level. Introduce new features 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

