■ Chapter 13: Action Games
■ Chapter 14: Strategy Games
■ Chapter 15: Role-Playing Games
■ Chapter 16: Sports Games
■ Chapter 17: Vehicle Simulations
■ Chapter 18: Construction and Management Simulations
■ Chapter 19: Adventure Games
■ Chapter 20: Artiﬁ cial Life and Puzzle Games
■ Chapter 21: Online Gaming
PART TWO
391


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Action Games
When most people hear the phrase video game, they tend to think of action games. 
The reason is historical: Almost all the earliest video games were action games, and 
some of those early games—Asteroids, Pac-Man, Space Invaders—have become iconic 
representatives of the action genre. However, the genre is vast and covers just about 
any imaginable activity that can be characterized in terms of physical challenges. 
In this chapter, you’ll learn the deﬁ nition of an action game, then go on to study 
the many subgenres of action games. Following that, we’ll look in more depth at 
the distinctive features of action games that set them apart from other genres. 
What Are Action Games?
ACTION GAME An action game is one in which the majority of challenges presented are 
tests of the player’s physical skills and coordination. Puzzle-solving, tactical conﬂ ict, 
and exploration challenges are often present as well.
Action games require good hand-eye coordination and usually require quick reac-
tions as well. The fastest action games are sometimes called twitch games, implying 
that the action takes place at almost a reﬂ ex level. In such games the player doesn’t 
have time for strategy or planning, so while the stress level is higher than in slower 
paced games, the intrinsic skill required for each challenge is lower. (See the sec-
tion “Skill, Stress, and Absolute Difﬁ culty” in Chapter 9, “Gameplay,” if you are not 
familiar with these terms.) Not all action games depend on raw speed, however. 
Some require other physical skills such as accurate aim, rhythm or timing, or the 
ability to execute combo moves—complicated sequences of commands.
Most arcade games are action games because arcade games make their money by 
quickly defeating unskillful players. Only highly skilled players can play them for a 
long time without losing. The simple core mechanics and gameplay of action games 
mean that those games without too much audiovisual content are also well suited 
to less powerful machines such as handhelds and mobile phones, and to web 
browser games.
CHAPTER 13
392


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACTION GAMES 
393
 CHAPTER 13
Action Game Subgenres
Action games fall into a number of subgenres based, like all game genre distinc-
tions, on the kinds of gameplay that they offer. The most familiar and popular 
action games are shooting games, but the genre also encompasses platform games, 
ﬁ ghting games, fast puzzle games, and a broad miscellany of others. Bear in mind 
that there is no industry standard for these terms, and other authors may refer to 
these subgenres by other names.
Shooters
In shooters, the player takes action at a distance, using a ranged weapon. Aiming
is therefore a key skill, particularly if the game provides only limited ammunition. 
In a shooting game, the player must focus attention on two places at once: the area 
around the avatar, and the target or targets.
We’ll look at two broad classes of shooting games: those that take place in a
two-dimensional landscape (2D shooters) and those that take place in a three-
dimensional landscape (3D shooters), of which by far the best-known are the 
ﬁ rst-person shooters. The “Camera Models” section, later in this chapter, discusses 
the differences between the ﬁ rst- and third-person perspectives.
2D SHOOTERS
The action in 2D shooters takes place in an environment viewed from either a
top-down or side-view perspective. Enemies shoot at the avatar, which can be a 
character or a vehicle, or approach to attack at close quarters. In many of these 
games the player is under attack by overwhelming numbers of enemies and must 
shoot them as fast as possible; such games are often called shoot-’em-ups. The player 
is usually armed with one or more weapons, and some weapons may be better 
suited to particular enemies than others. It is rare for a 2D shooter to keep track of 
ammunition (except for particularly powerful types of weapons); instead, the 
player ﬁ res frenetically and indiscriminately. The weapons seldom damage any-
thing except legitimate targets.
2D shooters seldom bother with realistic physics. Projectiles move at a constant 
speed and in a straight line, unaffected by gravity; vehicles and characters change 
direction instantaneously, ignoring inertia. These are the conventions of the sub-
genre, and you change them at your peril.
Some of the older 2D games have endured and remained popular despite their lim-
ited graphics—even inspiring modern versions—because they have excellent 
gameplay. The original Robotron: 2084, released into arcades in 1982, became an 
instant classic of the genre (see Figure 13.1). The object of this game was to defend 
the last human family against wave upon wave of killing machines bent on their 
destruction. A second joystick gave players the ability to shoot independently of 
TIP Don’t assume 
that shooting has 
to mean violence. 
You can characterize 
shooting in other ways, 
such as putting out a 
ﬁ re with a ﬁ re hose, 
painting an area with 
a paint gun, ﬁ lling up 
a space with objects, 
and so on. The game 
Portal used a “portal 
gun” to create connec-
tions between different 
locations.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

394 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
the avatar’s direction of movement. The strength of the Robotron gameplay
meant that, for many years, updates just weren’t needed. In fact, you can still
get pixel-perfect versions of Robotron: 2084 for the PC, Game Boy Advance, and 
other consoles.
Gauntlet, in its original arcade form, provided an option for cooperative multiplayer 
play, one of the ﬁ rst games to do so (see Figure 13.2). Each player could take on 
one of four avatars (Warrior, Wizard, Valkyrie, or Elf) and adventure together with 
the other members of the party through a seemingly endless series of dungeons, 
searching for treasure and food. This game introduced many of the common action 
game features we look at later, such as the locked door and key, monster generators, 
team play, and dungeon exit.
FIGURE 13.1 Robotron: 2084 and Robotron X
FIGURE 13.2 Gauntlet II and Gauntlet: Seven Sorrows


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACTION GAMES 
395
 CHAPTER 13
3D SHOOTERS
3D shooting games such as those in the Halo and Half-Life series have become so 
successful that to a great many younger gamers they are the epitome of the entire 
medium. Never mind that sports games are more popular than shooters on console 
machines, and strategy games are more popular on home computers (Entertainment
Software Association, 2009); 3D shooters are at the cutting edge of what game hard-
ware can do, and so they have the most dramatic graphics and get the most press. 
Figure 13.3 indicates just how far 3D shooters have come, from Maze War, an early ﬁ rst-
person shooter for the Xerox Star workstation, to the recently released Battleﬁ eld 1943.
FIGURE 13.3 Maze War and Battleﬁ eld 1943
3D shooters are more realistic than 2D shooters, often presenting familiar, or at 
least recognizable, worlds. In ﬁ rst-person shooters, the physics of the game is much 
more like that of the real world. Gravity works correctly (for the most part), sound 
diminishes with distance, objects cast shadows, and collisions are modeled with a 
fair level of accuracy. Some of these games, such as Electronic Arts’ Black, also 
implement deformable environments, in which the landscape actually changes 
shape in response to explosions and other events.
3D shooters use either a ﬁ rst-person perspective (the ﬁ rst-person shooter or FPS), or a 
third-person perspective, and many now offer both. The ﬁ rst-person perspective is 
sometimes reserved for the view through a riﬂ e’s scope or sights and cannot be 
used while the avatar is moving. The “Camera Models” section discusses these per-
spectives and their effect on the player’s experience.
3D shooters may be further subdivided:
■ Rail-shooters are so-called because players ﬁ ght through an enclosed environ-
ment that, like a railroad track, has few side branches; the player has few choices to 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

396 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
make and little exploration to do. Play consists of ﬁ ghting from the beginning to 
the end. Half-Life is the deﬁ nitive example.
■ Tactical shooters tend to simulate modern-era special forces teams. They offer 
realistic weapons and situations, and must be played carefully; they cannot be won 
with Rambo-style mayhem. Stealth and cover assume a large role. Tom Clancy’s 
Ghost Recon is a good example.
■ The survival horror class of games uses the power of modern graphics hardware 
to display disturbingly realistic blood and gore. Exploration takes on a large role in 
these games. The Silent Hill and Resident Evil series are both widely admired 
examples.
■ Arena games such as Quake III: Arena and Unreal Tournament are designed pri-
marily (and sometimes exclusively) for multiplayer deathmatch or team play in a 
conﬁ ned area. Much of the design effort goes into balancing the weapons and pow-
erups and creating interesting places in which to play. Games such as Battleﬁ eld 
1942 are their equivalents in outdoor settings, and the latter also permit the players 
to use vehicles.
An increasing number of single-player 3D shooter games are set in large, open 
worlds. Such games place few limitations on the player’s movement and provide a 
world populated with large numbers of AI-driven NPC characters, not all of whom 
are enemies. The Godfather and Grand Theft Auto series are well-known examples, 
although both of them offer a great deal of non-shooter gameplay. S.T.A.L.K.E.R.: 
Shadow of Chernobyl is a more conventional shooter set in the 30 kilometer exclu-
sion zone around the Chernobyl nuclear power plant. 
Platform Games
Platform games, or platformers, are cartoonish games in which an avatar moves 
through a vertically exaggerated environment, jumping on and off platforms at dif-
ferent heights, while avoiding obstacles and battling enemies. The avatar has a 
supernatural jumping ability and can’t be harmed by falling long distances (unless 
he falls onto something dangerous or into a bottomless chasm, both common fea-
tures of platform games). Most of the player’s actions consist of jumping, augmented
by various ﬂ ip-moves and by bouncy objects in the environment. Platform games 
use highly unrealistic physics; the avatar can usually change directions in midair.
The vast majority of 2D side-scrolling games with a humanoid avatar are platform 
games; Super Mario Bros. is the classic example. The conﬂ ict in platform games is 
often mild and suitable for children. Both Mario and Sonic the Hedgehog attacked 
enemies simply by jumping on top of them. Stricken enemies disappeared without 
undue anguish.
3D platform games, while popular, have never managed to achieve quite the same 
level of iconic status as 2D games. Crash Bandicoot is one of the more successful 3D 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACTION GAMES 
397
 CHAPTER 13
platformers. Unfortunately, the addition of a third dimension makes control more 
complicated and difﬁ cult; the “Controls” section discusses this in more detail.
Fighting Games
Fighting games have little in common with other action games because they 
involve neither exploration, shooting, nor puzzle-solving. They still qualify as 
action games because they place great demands on a player’s physical skills: reac-
tion time and timing. These games simulate hand-to-hand combat, usually using 
highly exaggerated moves vaguely modeled on Asian martial arts techniques. 
(Serious boxing games belong more to the sports genre than to the action genre, as 
they try to model the techniques of boxing realistically.) Fighting games may be 
further subdivided into those in which characters ﬁ ght in one-on-one bouts, and 
mêlée games in which one or two characters ﬁ ght against large numbers of oppo-
nents. (The latter are sometimes called beat-‘em-ups.) Fighting games also use 
hand-to-hand weapons such as swords and staves, and a limited number of ranged 
weapons. Figure 13.4 shows screen shots from two ﬁ ghting games, Street Fighter and 
Dead or Alive 3.
FIGURE 13.4 Fighting games, Street Fighter and Dead or Alive 3
The player’s actions typically consist of hand-to-hand attacking and defending 
moves of various sorts. Typically, certain defenses block some attacks but not oth-
ers, and players have to learn when and how the moves are effective through trial 
and error. Each successful attack takes energy away from the character hit, and the 
game continues until one ﬁ ghter’s energy drops to zero. The strategy of the game 
rather resembles rock-paper-scissors as players try to guess which move their oppo-
nent will use next.
A common feature of ﬁ ghting games is the combo move, often simply shortened to 
combo. Because early console and arcade machines offered only a small number of 
buttons and a simple 8-way joystick or D-pad, there was no way to assign a separate 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

398
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
button to each of the moves that the designers wanted to include. To compensate 
for this and to create an extra challenge, they designed games so that the player 
would execute an especially effective or spectacular attack if she could rapidly issue 
a particular sequence of buttons and joystick maneuvers. The effectiveness of the 
move is often related to its difﬁ culty of execution; more complex combos carry 
higher risk because the avatar is open to attack while the player carries out the 
sequence. 
When the software detects that a player has started a combo move, it sometimes 
displays a combo meter somewhere on the screen—a visual indicator of the player’s 
progress through pressing the buttons. If the player stops or gets the sequence 
wrong, the meter resets to zero and she has to start over.
Bout-structured ﬁ ghting games tend to show all the ﬁ ghters on-screen at once from 
a side view. Even in a game that uses 3D technology to display the world and the 
ﬁ ghters, the play is largely 2D in the plane of the video screen. The ﬁ ghters move 
left and right and may jump up and down, but they seldom move toward the player 
or away from him. Again, realistic boxing games are an exception because they try 
to model the ring and boxers’ movements accurately—another reason why they’re 
not usually classed with ﬁ ghting games.
Most innovation in ﬁ ghting games consists of developments in characters’ actions 
and reactions. This includes their interactions with each other and their environ-
ment and their reactions to injury, as well as the methods used to control the 
ﬁ ghters—especially when considering how to handle special moves and combos.
Fast Puzzle Games
Most computerized puzzle games, such as Sokoban, move slowly and allow the 
player to think about his next move for as long as he wants, so they’re not action 
games. Fast puzzle games require the player to solve a problem as quickly as possi-
ble. These games are usually simple, visually abstract, have a limited control set, 
and are easy to design and build. Tetris is the archetypal fast puzzle game. Other 
examples include Collapse!, Columns, and Bejeweled in its timed mode. Casual gam-
ers like fast puzzle games because they are easy to learn and don’t take a long time 
to play. They also don’t use stereotypical content associated with many video 
games: no guns, no dragons, no scantily clad women. This subgenre is ideal for 
handheld devices and cell phones.
Action-Adventures
The action-adventure is a hybrid genre, combining features from both action 
games and adventure games. To play them well requires a fair amount of physical 
skill, but they also offer a storyline, numerous characters, an inventory system, dia-
log, and other features of adventure games. The later editions of the Zelda series for 
the Nintendo 64 and Nintendo GameCube are action-adventures, as is Indiana Jones 
NOTE Assassin’s 
Creed combines the 
close-combat ﬁ ghting 
of a more conventional 
ﬁ ghting game with 
the open world and 
missions of a Grand 
Theft Auto style game, 
producing a unique 
hybrid.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACTION GAMES 
399
 CHAPTER 13
and the Infernal Machine. The earlier, 2D isometric Indiana Jones games were pure 
adventure games.
Chapter 19, “Adventure Games,” discusses action-adventures in more detail. 
Music, Dance, and Rhythm Games
Dance Dance Revolution, PaRappa the Rapper, and similar games belong to a compara-
tively new subgenre of action games, those that challenge the player’s sense of 
rhythm. They typically show an avatar on screen who dances in response to the 
player’s button presses. In single-player mode, the player’s avatar must dance better 
than a computer-controlled character; in multiplayer mode, two avatars compete 
head to head. The screen shows which dance step the player should perform next, 
while the game awards points for pressing the correct button on the controller or 
pad on a dance mat, and for being on the beat.
Music games are more recent arrivals. The huge success of Guitar Hero and Rock 
Band demonstrates that a lot of players want to enjoy the fantasy of being a musi-
cian—even though they don’t actually make music in these games. Much of the 
fun in these games comes from using their specialized, guitar-shaped controllers. 
Other Action Games
A great many action games don’t ﬁ t neatly into any of the preceding subgenres, and 
the variety among them is enormous. They are difﬁ cult to categorize except in neg-
ative terms: They don’t involve shooting, hand-to-hand ﬁ ghting, or abstract puzzle 
solving. They do, however, frequently use representational puzzle solving. Most of 
these action games demand skills such as maneuvering and path planning.
Frogger, shown in Figure 13.5, is a good example of an action game that belongs to 
no obvious subgenre. The player maneuvers the world’s only nonswimming frog 
family across a busy road and a logging river infested with crocodiles. A highly suc-
cessful arcade game launched in 1981, the Frogger series eventually became one of 
the most successful of all time. Hasbro’s 1997 remake, Frogger 3D (also shown in 
Figure 13.5) sold millions of copies, remaining on the software bestsellers charts for 
many months after release. The developers kept the gameplay virtually unchanged 
and just updated the presentation, increasing the variety of the levels available to 
the player. Frogger 2: Swampy’s Revenge, a sequel to Frogger 3D, introduced a more 
structured game while still remaining faithful to the gameplay of the original.
Other notable action games that don’t ﬁ t into deﬁ ned subgenres include Pong,
Marble Madness, Pac-Man, Q*bert, Lemmings, and Katamari Damacy. Both Marble 
Madness (1986) and Katamari Damacy (2004) use an excellent but seldom-seen chal-
lenge, controlling a rolling object that exhibits inertia. Lemmings, a brilliant game 
about trying to prevent a group of dim-witted creatures from killing themselves by 
NOTE Players could 
instantly understand 
what they were sup-
posed to do in Frogger,
which accounts for a 
lot of its success. It 
also appealed to both 
male and female play-
ers at a time when that 
was rare. These are 
qualities to strive for.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

400 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
falling off cliffs, involves selecting particular creatures and assigning tasks to them 
that inﬂ uence the way the others move, all under time pressure.
FIGURE 13.5 Frogger and Frogger 3D
Game Features
Action games provide a good ﬁ eld in which to study many features also found in 
other genres because the simplicity of action games means that the issues aren’t 
obscured by other considerations. Action games tend to set simple, obvious goals 
and offer clear, direct ways to reach them (although the goals may be difﬁ cult to 
achieve).
Although 2D action games are no longer the state of the art technically, if you are a 
student, you will probably be asked to build a simple 2D action game as your ﬁ rst 
project. This is a great place to start, providing you with practice using—and a way 
to demonstrate your grasp of—the fundamentals of game design. You can easily 
build small 2D action games with very little programming by using the free Game 
Maker tool from YoYo Games. Download it at www.yoyogames.com.
Progression
Level progression in action games tends to be linear. Once the player completes 
all levels, she has won the whole game. (There are exceptions; in Spyro the Dragon,
the player has a choice of levels at any given time. Completing some levels unlocks 
others not previously available.) Within a level, progress may be linear (the player 
can go only forward or back) or nonlinear (the player has some freedom to choose 
her own path). Occasionally a linear level includes a hidden shortcut that, when 
discovered, allows the player to jump ahead, bypassing many obstacles and dangers.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACTION GAMES 
401
 CHAPTER 13
LEVELS
Designers often group action game levels by theme. All the levels in a themed set 
have a similar appearance and a similar set of enemies or obstacles to overcome. A set 
of themed levels usually ends in an encounter with a big boss, who must be defeated. 
In some cases, the player must acquire powerups or gain skills while completing 
tasks in the levels to defeat that set’s big boss and progress to the next set of levels.
Each level presents the player with a variety of challenges, and failure to surmount 
them eventually causes the player to lose the game—whether it’s dancing well in a 
dance game or shooting things in a shooter. However, in most such games, the 
sequence of the challenges in a given level remains the same from one play session 
to the next. Except for the occasional wildcard enemy (described later in this chap-
ter), the player can be conﬁ dent that if a given region contains certain challenges 
the ﬁ rst time it’s played, the same region will contain exactly the same challenges 
the next time. Thus, players eventually ﬁ nish action games by learning what tasks 
lie ahead and how to accomplish them through repeated attempts.
As a designer, you will ﬁ nd that levels are easier to balance when they contain 
ﬁ xed, rather than randomized, challenges. However, this approach makes the game 
repetitious, and that makes the game unattractive to two groups: those who don’t 
like repetitive play and those who don’t have a lot of leisure time. To avoid alienat-
ing those groups, include a save-and-reload feature so the player can restart the 
game in the middle whenever he loses. Alternatively, use checkpoints, as described 
in the next section.
Level design is discussed in more detail in Chapter 12, “General Principles of
Level Design.”
PLANNING YOUR PACING
As Chapter 12 explained, the most important level design principle for action games 
is variety of pacing. Game developers often waste a lot of time and money rebuild-
ing game levels because something just doesn’t feel right—the pacing is wrong. 
In two valuable Gamasutra articles, “Gameplay Fundamentals Revisited: Harnessed 
Pacing and Intensity” and “Gameplay Fundamentals Revisited, Part 2: Building a 
Pacing Structure,” Mike Lopez argues that to avoid poor pacing, you should plan 
the pacing of your entire game in advance, during the pre-production phase of 
development (Lopez, 2008a and 2008b). (Note that this is not the same as the con-
cept stage of game design. Pre-production takes place during the early part of the 
elaboration stage.) He recommends a nine-step process to create an intensity and 
pacing plan for your game, summarized brieﬂ y here:
1. Brainstorm. Think of locations for your levels, exciting moments of action asso-
ciated with those locations (such as “the building collapses”), and generic moments 
of excitement that are independent of location (such as suddenly facing a powerful 
enemy). At this point you’re not deciding on the sequence of these events, just 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

402 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
thinking of the kinds of events you’d like to have. Remember, this applies to the 
entire game, not just a single level.
2. Set priorities. Decide which of the ideas generated by brainstorming are most 
important.
3. Create a story framework. Don’t write the entire story; just create a high-level 
outline that interweaves plot elements with the actions you have planned so they 
work together.
4. Rate and sequence key events. Give each planned event a numeric intensity 
rating (say, from 1–10). Using these ratings, construct a sequence of events that 
builds toward rising moments of intensity throughout each level, and throughout 
the game generally. The intensity at the beginning of a level should be somewhat 
lower than the intensity at the end of the previous level.
5. Rate and sequence plot points. Do the same thing with the major plot points 
in your story framework that you did with the key events: determine their intensity 
and ﬁ gure out where they ﬁ t in best. Include periods of reduced intensity between 
moments of high excitement; Lopez recommends using devices such as narration 
or dialog for these periods.
6. Set the time between high-intensity events. Space the high-intensity events so 
that they occur at reasonable intervals and don’t last too long. This is one of the 
most intricate and uncertain aspects of level design. You cannot estimate this pre-
cisely because players don’t all play at the same rate. Be sure to playtest your game 
with both skilled and unskilled players. 
7. Evaluate the trends. Step back from your plan and examine the whole thing, 
looking for any gaps or anomalies, such as an exciting moment that is much less 
exciting than the one that preceded it, which might feel like an anticlimax. (This is 
not the same as a lull or relaxation period.)
8. Begin constructing levels. The level designers can now begin building the lev-
els according to the pacing plan.
9. Review and iterate. Test and adjust what you’ve built to be sure you are achiev-
ing your pacing goals. 
Lopez intends his approach primarily for use in action games to reproduce the kind 
of roller coaster ride that people experience watching TV shows such as 24 or Prison 
Break. This method, while clearly not suited to all genres, is valuable not only for 
action games, but for many hybrid genres such as action-adventures and action-ori-
ented role-playing games, and it works for games of different sizes. You can 
construct a classic side-scrolling action game like Sonic the Hedgehog using this pro-
cess just as effectively as you can a modern ﬁ rst-person shooter.  Look up Lopez’s 
original articles for a more in-depth discussion, complete with examples.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACTION GAMES 
403
 CHAPTER 13
CHECKPOINTS
Some action games allow the player to explicitly save and resume the game at any 
time, which allows them to recover from failure, but many do not. Older games 
required the player to start again from the beginning of the current level or even 
the beginning of the entire game. This is now considered poor design. In many 
modern games, the avatar’s new incarnation appears in the same location at which 
it died, or if that is impossible (for example, if Mario falls into water), then the new 
avatar appears in the last safe location it occupied before it died (for example, the 
last platform that Mario occupied before he fell into the water). The state of the 
level remains unchanged—the avatar just appears, and play resumes. Apart from 
the loss of a life and perhaps the loss of the avatar’s possessions, the player is not 
punished for letting the avatar die.
Avatars may also reappear at a checkpoint. Checkpoints mark the positions on a
level at which a player’s avatar may appear in its next incarnation if it should die
in that level. As the player progresses through a level, he passes through one or 
more checkpoints along the way, usually marked by some visual indicator that 
changes to inform the player it has been passed. In Sonic the Hedgehog, for example, 
streetlamps mark the checkpoints, turning from white to red when the avatar 
passes them (see Figure 13.6). If the avatar dies, the level is reset to the condition
it was in when the player last successfully passed a checkpoint, and the avatar
reappears at the checkpoint location.
FIGURE 13.6 
This lamppost check-
point (between the 
totem pole and the 
tree) in Sonic the 
Hedgehog turns red 
when the hedgehog 
passes it. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

404 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
LEVEL EXITS, LEVEL WARPS, AND TELEPORTERS
Many action games that require the player to explore the layout of each level desig-
nate a particular location as the normal transition point to the next level—the level 
exit or dungeon exit. A level exit may be guarded by enemies, be well hidden, or both. 
Finding and passing through the level exit is usually the primary goal of the level.
Game designers often provide more than one exit from a level: the standard exit, 
which takes the player to the next level, and one or more special exits that jump 
the player ahead several levels or take the player to an otherwise secret level. These 
are known as level warps. Level warps are usually hidden or particularly difﬁ cult to 
reach, and the reward is proportional to the level of sacriﬁ ce required to get to them.
Games from Stargate to Luigi’s Mansion and the Super Mario series use level warps. If 
you provide a hidden exit, you may want to give the player a subtle clue. For exam-
ple, in Super Mario World, the world overview map shows levels with secret exits as 
ﬂ ashing red dots, rather than ﬂ ashing yellow dots. The red dots are a signal to the 
player (without telling him explicitly) that the level contains a secret exit.
A teleporter is a transition point that causes the player’s avatar to jump someplace 
else within the same level. These points may be marked by a sign or object that tells 
the player he has found a teleporter, or they may be unmarked, giving the player 
no warning that he is about to be teleported and no explanation for why he is sud-
denly somewhere else. Teleporters often become available at the end of a long 
period of exploration, so the player can simply jump back to a previous location 
(such as a home base or camp) without having to walk all the way back.
Challenges
Action games have more different kinds of challenges than just about any other 
genre, although almost all of these challenges test physical skills—speed and reac-
tion time, steering and shooting, timing and rhythm, and the ability to execute 
combo moves in ﬁ ghting games. Other common types of challenges include pat-
tern recognition (recognizing the attack and patrol behaviors of enemies) and 
exploration (learning your way around a space). A few action games, such as Tetris
and Portal, include puzzle-solving elements. The complexity of the puzzles should 
be inversely proportional to the amount of time pressure the player feels.
This section looks at the way pure action games characteristically present and
organize their challenges. Action-adventure hybrid games frequently incorporate 
challenges from the adventure game genre, such as locked doors and mazes. See
the “Challenges” section of Chapter 19 for more information.
OBSTACLES AND DANGERS
In a game that requires navigation through a space, the player’s avatar is typically 
faced with three types of problems: passive obstacles, stationary dangers, and active 
dangers or enemies.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACTION GAMES 
405
 CHAPTER 13
A passive obstacle impedes movement without actually threatening the avatar. To 
get past a wall or a chasm, the player climbs over or jumps across. Obstacles can 
also trap the avatar in a region with other dangers. Obstacles are usually, but not 
always, indestructible.
A stationary danger attacks the avatar when she gets close to it but does not move 
around the landscape. Examples of stationary dangers include electric fences, 
swinging blades on a pendulum, or plants that bite. Some stationary dangers must 
be attacked or destroyed to allow the avatar to pass by; others are indestructible 
and must be treated like obstacles, so the avatar has to avoid or surmount them.
Active dangers, or enemies, attack the avatar, moving around in the landscape. In 
old games, they often moved in a ﬁ xed pattern that the player could learn to avoid, 
but in modern games, artiﬁ cially intelligent enemies locate and pursue the avatar. 
See Chapter 6, “Character Development,” for more information on designing 
enemy characters.
WAVES
When enemies appear or attack in groups, usually groups of the same type or simi-
lar types of enemies, they are said to come in waves. The makeup of the wave 
normally varies, including a selection of enemies appropriate to the current level of 
the game. As the game progresses, the waves include stronger enemies. At later 
stages of the game you may want to phase out the earlier weaker enemies, because 
they will no longer provide an effective challenge. Enemies increase in strength 
and number, reaching a peak at the end of the level.
Waves of enemies can appear in exactly the same way every time the player plays
(a scripted wave) or they may vary according to an algorithm that you design. 
Scripted waves of enemies have appeared in games ranging from the original Space
Invaders to Max Payne and many others. In these types of games, you simply build 
the size and composition of the wave into the level however you wish.
If you want waves of enemies to arrive according to an algorithm rather than in a 
ﬁ xed progression, choose particular locations in the level (or time intervals in the 
game) and a pool of enemy types from which to draw the enemies who will appear. 
Design your algorithm to select a number of enemies consistent with the level of 
the game and the difﬁ culty setting, if there is one. You can implement a simple 
form of dynamic difﬁ culty adjustment by having your algorithm check the amount 
of avatar lives or health points remaining; if the number is low, generate fewer ene-
mies or weaker ones.
THE BIG BOSS
In many games, a large enemy, or big boss, signiﬁ cantly harder to ﬁ ght than any of 
the previously encountered enemies, guards the end of a group of themed levels. 
Defeating the boss takes the player to a new set of themed levels. Boss characters 
TIP The player won’t 
know the algorithm 
that generates waves 
of enemies and may 
perceive their arrival 
to be random. You 
should not really 
generate waves at 
random, however, 
or you risk creating 
spikes or troughs in 
the difﬁ culty level.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

406 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
often can’t be hurt by normal methods; damaging them may require special weap-
ons, a special attack method, or special timing. For example, the Piranha Plants in 
Super Mario Sunshine are invincible until they open their mouths.
The boss character’s appearance and actions complement the theme of the set of 
levels it guards. Sometimes the boss character is simply a much larger version of 
another character that the player already defeated. This enhances the gameplay by 
allowing the player to predict some of the boss’s behavior and gives him a small 
advantage in knowing what to expect.
Games with a serious storyline aren’t suited for such an unsubtle set of themed
levels, but even so, the themed level and big boss are mainstays of action games. 
Virtually every level-based, action-based game today uses a succession of levels 
increasing in difﬁ culty, culminating in a climactic defeat of a big boss. 
WILDCARD ENEMIES
To break up the predictability of predeﬁ ned waves of enemies, many games insert a 
randomly generated wildcard enemy to provide a fresh challenge. Wildcard ene-
mies, unlike level bosses, normally attack at the same time as normal enemies and 
behave in unexpected ways.
The Atari game Asteroids, for instance, offers predictable waves of enemies (in this 
case drifting rocks; although they do not shoot, they are still an active danger), but 
at random times during the waves, a UFO appears and follows an unpredictable 
path, shooting at the player. The game awards extra points for shooting the UFO, 
but trying to do this tends to distract the player and cause her to make mistakes: a 
perfect example of risk and reward in an action game.
MONSTER GENERATORS AND SPAWN POINTS
Many action games include a feature that causes new enemies to suddenly appear 
in the game world. If the enemies appear from a visible object that the player can 
destroy, that object is a monster generator. If the enemies appear seemingly out of 
thin air at a particular location, that location is a spawn point. The game Doom uses 
spawn points: Monsters suddenly appear, each in a ﬂ ash of green light, and there is 
nothing a player can do to prevent it. In Gauntlet, on the other hand, monster gen-
erators are machines visible in the game world. If the player destroys a monster 
generator, no more monsters come out of it. As a result, the player has a choice of 
strategies: ﬁ ght the monsters or destroy the generator. The strategy with the lowest 
risk involves destroying the monster generators before they can spawn too many 
monsters, but players aiming for the highest score may delay destroying the mon-
ster generator until they boost their scores sufﬁ ciently by killing enough monsters. 
This choice makes the game more interesting.
Monster generators and spawn points may create either a limited or an unlimited 
number of enemies. If you design a spawn point that produces an unlimited 
TIP Don’t use spawn 
points or monster 
generators in single-
player combat games 
set in realistic situa-
tions such as World 
War II. In a realistic 
environment, the play-
er reasonably expects 
that when he clears a 
region of enemies, it 
will remain empty. You 
can still have enemies 
walk, drive, or ﬂ y in 
from elsewhere, but 
having them materialize 
out of thin air destroys 
your game’s credibility.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACTION GAMES 
407
 CHAPTER 13
number of enemies, the player can never defeat them all and must meet some other 
condition (such as ﬁ nding the level exit) to make the level end. If you use a mon-
ster generator instead, even if it generates enemies indeﬁ nitely, the player can 
ultimately get rid of them all by destroying the generator itself. A monster genera-
tor or spawn point might produce only one type of enemy, or it might offer a range 
of different foes. You should adjust the strength of the enemies that it generates 
based on the difﬁ culty level of the game.
Player Actions
Action games routinely allow moving or maneuvering an avatar; aiming and shoot-
ing; selecting, collecting, manipulating, or modifying objects; and various kinds of 
ﬁ ghting moves—punching, kicking, defending, and so on. Platformers naturally 
include a number of moves for climbing and jumping. 3D shooters frequently offer 
a number of specialized activities associated with infantry combat, including 
crouching or lying prone to avoid ﬁ re and improve one’s aim, dropping and rolling 
to get out of danger, and peeking out from behind cover.
Two specialty actions—smart bombs and hyperspace escape—are characteristic of 
action games and are seldom found anywhere else. They’re normally found in 
high-speed 2D games. A smart bomb sounds like an object, but it’s usually imple-
mented as an action available to the player. Pressing the smart bomb button clears 
the area immediately surrounding the avatar, typically leaving it entirely free of 
enemies, although the range cleared varies from game to game. Because the smart 
bomb is so powerful, you should make it costly, generally by making it available 
only once or by making its effect diminish every time it is used. Because the player 
doesn’t know what lies ahead, he is always faced with the decision of whether to 
use it in a given situation or to try to make do without it in case he gets into even 
worse trouble later on.
Hyperspace escape is a button or other player-selectable option that instantly 
moves the player’s avatar to another location in the game world, normally at ran-
dom. It’s a means of getting out of trouble. However, unlike the smart bomb, a 
hyperspace escape is just as likely to land the avatar in an equally difﬁ cult situation 
as it is to transport it to safety. Asteroids provides an example of the early use of 
hyperspace escape. Designers usually allow players to use the hyperspace button 
more frequently than the smart bomb because the usefulness of the maneuver is 
balanced by the chance that the avatar could end up in an even worse situation. 
Ironically, the more likely the Asteroids player is to need it (usually because of the 
amount of debris on the playﬁ eld), the more risk there is to the player. 
Core Mechanics Features
The core mechanics of action games should be simple and obvious. Action games 
have small numbers of resources, and the relationships among these resources are 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

408 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
straightforward: Being hit by an enemy costs energy points; collecting gold stars 
increases the ﬁ nal score; and so on. The player in an action game is too busy to 
study a complex internal economy.
LIVES
Designers usually allow the player’s avatar a small number of reprieves from death. 
The number of lives provided usually ranges between three and ﬁ ve. Colliding with 
an enemy or some other dangerous object costs the player a life. Players earn extra 
lives by picking up a powerup or reaching a certain score. The player’s avatar is usu-
ally invulnerable for a few seconds when he reappears after losing a life, so he can 
regain his bearings. When the player loses all his lives, he must either start over or 
return to the most recent checkpoint or saved game. The limited-life mechanic 
remains standard for arcade games, but it is being replaced rapidly in console and 
computer games by designs that allow unlimited lives.
ENERGY
The player’s avatar begins the game with a limited amount of energy, sometimes 
characterized as hit points or health. Dangerous encounters with enemies or other 
hazardous features of the game world deplete this energy; in some games time 
itself, just living in the game world, consumes energy.
This energy can often be partially or even fully replenished by using a collectible or 
a powerup, but when the avatar’s energy is fully depleted, it dies. In a game in 
which avatars have multiple lives, when the avatar’s energy is completely depleted, 
one of its lives is lost.
In some games, an avatar’s energy is shared over a number of physical features
—for example, energy can be a limited resource that is distributed between shields 
and fuel, requiring the player to carefully balance resources.
POWERUPS
As a reward for progress, the player may be given a powerup, that is, the opportu-
nity to increase her avatar’s strength or some other attribute temporarily or even 
permanently. In the case of a shooter, this can come in the form of stronger weap-
ons or shields.
A permanent powerup is one that remains with the avatar for an extended period—
possibly the remainder of the game but at least the current life or level. Space Tripper
(and many other shooters) uses this model, although Space Tripper is unusual in 
that when the avatar dies, it loses only powerups gained on the most recent level.
Temporary powerups provide a powerful but short-lived advantage. These may be 
limited by time—for example, the avatar may move faster, but only for a short 
period, from a few seconds to a few minutes—or by the number of times they can 
be used. For example, a shield may be used up after it has absorbed a certain 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACTION GAMES 
409
 CHAPTER 13
number of hits. A general design rule is that the more powerful the advantage, the 
shorter the time the avatar should be allowed to use it. The Quad Damage powerup 
in Quake III provides a perfect example of the temporary powerup; it quadruples 
the damage that the player’s weapons do for 30 seconds.
Some games vary the use of powerups by using power points. The player receives a 
certain number of power points to spend on an upgrade and enjoys some latitude 
in deciding how she wants to upgrade her avatar. Space Tripper provides two main 
weapons; the currently selected weapon will be upgraded when the player uses her 
power points. Playing Space Tripper successfully requires that the player balance the 
upgrade points between these weapons.
COLLECTIBLES
Collectibles are bonus objects the player can pick up that are not essential to the 
game and are often used only to augment the player’s score. The player is not 
penalized for failing to collect them, but if he can justify the risk, then the rewards 
are high.
Collectibles can also unlock secret levels or cause special bonus events to occur. In 
Rainbow Islands, the player can collapse rainbows onto his enemies. As the enemies 
die, they deposit crystals the player can collect to earn bonus points. Collecting the 
crystals in the right order (red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet) opens a 
doorway to a secret level, which gives the player a huge score and a permanent 
secret powerup.
TIME LIMIT
Many games employ a timer that counts down from some initial value to zero. 
When the timer reaches zero, some major game event occurs.
A level timer indicates how much time the player has to complete the level; if he 
fails to do so, the level and the level timer are reset, and the player has to start 
again. This is often accompanied by a life loss. If the player ﬁ nishes the level with 
time remaining on the level timer, then this excess time may be multiplied by a 
constant as a score bonus, or the player may receive some other reward for complet-
ing the level early.
You can also use a timer to count down to a catastrophe. The player must achieve 
some task before the timer runs out, or the task becomes much more difﬁ cult to 
achieve. Sinistar uses this form of time limit to good effect; when the timer runs 
out, the eponymous Sinistar has been built, and the player is in a lot of trouble.
Time limits may also govern the effectiveness of powerups. In this case, when the 
timer runs out, a temporary powerup stops being effective, and the player’s avatar 
reverts to its normal state. Pac-Man’s power pellets, which allow the Pac-Man to eat 
the ghosts for a limited time, are good examples of this use of time limits.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

410 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
SCORE
For many action game players, earning a high score is more important than the 
story. Keep track of the player’s accomplishments: completing tasks, defeating ene-
mies, collecting items, length of time through each level, and so on. One of these 
numbers is normally more important than the others, especially if it is the one that 
determines victory over other players in a multiplayer game. Which achievement is 
most important depends on the subgenre of the game; in deathmatch shooter 
games, for example, frags (enemy kills) are the most important. Display the player’s 
primary score, whichever score that is, onscreen at all times in the primary game-
play mode. Display the player’s other achievements at the end of the levels. Be sure 
to provide one or more high-score tables so the players can see their own earlier 
achievements in single-player games and compare themselves with others in multi-
player ones. 
Many games reward skillful play with bonus scores and multipliers. The classic 
example of the score multiplier can be found in Pac-Man: After getting the power 
pill, the ﬁ rst ghost that the player eats earns 200 points, the next earns 400 points, 
then 800, and then 1600. 
Victory Conditions
Not all action games have victory conditions because not all games can be won—in 
some games, the most the player can aspire to is a higher score. The object of Space
Invaders is supposedly to save Earth from waves of evil alien invaders, but each 
wave gets faster and more aggressive until the aliens overwhelm the player. The 
game is unwinnable. This design is now considered outdated for any but arcade 
machines. On other types of machines there is no reason to discourage the player 
from playing for as long as she wants and indeed completing the game.
The victory conditions in simple action games tend to be either crystal clear and 
known to the player in advance—Banjo needs to rescue his sister in Banjo-Kazooie
—or nonexistent, as in the case of Space Invaders. In action games with a storyline, 
the designers often change the (apparent) victory condition as the game goes on. In 
Half-Life, for example, the player’s ﬁ rst goal is simply to get out of the Black Mesa 
research complex, but later she discovers that she has to do more things before she 
can win the game.
Interaction Model
The most commonly used interaction model for action games is the avatar, found 
in everything from the original Space Invaders to Half-Life 2. In games that involve 
exploration or defeating enemy attackers, it makes the most sense for the player to 
project his will into the game world at a single point, the location of the avatar. 
However, in subgenres in which the player neither ﬁ ghts nor explores, the avatar 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACTION GAMES 
411
 CHAPTER 13
model makes less sense. Tetris, for example, uses a puzzle-manipulation model. 
Lemmings uses an omnipresent model; the player may click any lemming at any time.
The nature of the actions you choose to include will tend to dictate your interac-
tion model. Ask yourself what the player is going to do, and that will tell you how 
she should do it.
Camera Models
Because the player must see and react to events so quickly in action games, the 
choice of camera model is critical. We’ll look ﬁ rst at the distinction between 2D 
and 3D games and then at the choices available in 3D games.
2D CAMERA MODELS
Two-dimensional action games typically use one of two camera models: a side view 
or a top-down view. Tetris uses a side view; Robotron: 2084 uses a top view of the 
playﬁ eld, although the characters themselves are displayed side-on. If the side view 
can scroll long distances to the left and right, this is known as side-scrolling and is 
classic for avatar-based games from Defender to Kung Fu Panda. Top-down views 
sometimes scroll long distances from the top to the bottom of the screen as the 
avatar moves forward through an environment; this is known as top-scrolling and is 
best known in ﬂ ying games like Xevious. Gauntlet has a top-down view that scrolls 
in all four directions.
You may also design your game so that it scrolls continuously at a ﬁ xed rate from 
top to bottom or right to left; this is called continuous scrolling. It puts more pressure 
on the player because she cannot stop it; she can only deal with challenges as they 
come. Variable scrolling causes the landscape to scroll under, or behind, the avatar 
in direct response to the player’s actions; if the avatar turns around and goes in the 
opposite direction, the view duly scrolls back again. In effect, it lets the player run 
away from enemies and perhaps even take a break.
Continuous scrolling and variable scrolling have a direct effect on the gameplay, 
because the latter allows the player to control the pace at which he faces enemies, 
whereas the former does not. You may also encounter another term, parallax scroll-
ing, which is a cosmetic display technique with no actual effect on the gameplay. 
Parallax scrolling creates a slight illusion of three dimensions in a two-dimensional 
environment by having objects that are designated as being in the background 
scroll by more slowly than the ones in the foreground. This gives the impression 
that the background objects are farther away.
3D FIRST PERSON
In games set in a 3D space, the perspective is most often, but not always, closely 
tied to an avatar with either a ﬁ rst-person or a third-person point of view. The ﬁ rst-
person perspective is particularly successful for high-speed 3D shooting games such 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

412 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
as the Quake series because it enables the player to see clearly what she is shooting 
at, without the avatar blocking part of the screen. Unfortunately, the ﬁ rst-person 
perspective does not let the player see the area around the avatar very clearly; she 
can only see ahead of the avatar, whatever faces the avatar, and so this point of 
view is unsuitable for ﬁ ghting games (such as Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time) in 
which enemies attack the avatar from all sides.
Although the ﬁ rst-person perspective seems realistic in principle, in fact, on a con-
ventional monitor with a 4:3 aspect ratio, the ﬁ rst-person view constrains the 
player’s vision to about a 30-degree arc. The normal human enjoys an arc of vision 
of about 120 degrees horizontally, so the player’s ﬁ eld of view is really only about 
one-fourth of normal size. Widescreen TVs have begun to help with this, and fortu-
nately the mouse-based user interface of most ﬁ rst-person games enables the player 
to look left and right more quickly than she could in real life. In order to be fair to 
the player of a ﬁ rst-person single-player game, however, you must still make sure 
that most of her enemies approach her from the front.
The ﬁ rst-person perspective also allows nice touches such as zooming, giving the 
impression that the avatar is using binoculars or a riﬂ e with a telescopic sight.
3D THIRD PERSON
Many 3D games, such as Super Mario Sunshine, Gears of War, and the Tomb Raider
series, offer a third-person view. The player can see his avatar on-screen, usually 
from a viewpoint in which the camera is behind and somewhat above the avatar. 
Players can see some distance ahead of the avatar, though not as far as in the ﬁ rst-
person view because the camera is tilted downward. In this case, you must not 
present the player with dangers at a very long range (for example, an enemy with a 
sniper riﬂ e) because the player won’t be able to see them until it’s too late.
Players may also see a little of what is behind and to the side of the avatar. In these 
types of games, the camera must move to follow the avatar both predictably and 
unobtrusively. Many third-person shooters allow the player to switch to a ﬁ rst-
person perspective momentarily for more precise aiming. Some ﬁ rst-person 
shooters switch to third-person in particular situations. Halo switches from ﬁ rst
to third whenever the avatar gets into a vehicle (at which time the vehicle itself 
temporarily becomes the avatar).
GAMEPLAY IMPLICATIONS OF 2D AND 3D
In a 3D environment, the player cannot easily tell the speed or distance of objects 
that come directly toward her point of view. (This is also true in the real world, 
while driving, for example.) By operating in only two dimensions, 2D games 
remove this problem and simplify the amount of visual processing that the player 
must do. She can directly see the distance between her avatar and other objects, 
she can clearly see the speed at which things are moving, and she doesn’t have to 
construct a mental 3D model of a space as she explores it. This means that 2D 
TIP Resident Evil 4
introduces an innova-
tion, a third-person 
camera positioned im-
mediately behind the 
avatar’s right shoulder, 
rather than farther 
back as in Tomb Raider.
This approach makes
it impossible 
to see the avatar’s 
entire body, but the 
player can aim and 
see dangers much 
more easily than in 
traditional third-
person games. The 
technique achieves 
some of the beneﬁ ts 
of the ﬁ rst-person 
view in a third-person 
perspective.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACTION GAMES 
413
 CHAPTER 13
games can throw a lot more challenges at the player before overwhelming her—in 
short, they can simply be more frenetic than 3D games.
Three-dimensional games make greater use of the environment to present their 
challenges than 2D games do. The player must traverse a complex three-dimensional
landscape, which requires him to remember how rooms join other rooms. This isn’t 
so bad in environments with conventional architecture but it can become night-
marish in unfamiliar spaces or those in which rooms or regions all look alike. 
Descent provided a particularly good example of this problem: The player’s space-
ship ﬂ ies through a sort of zero-gravity 3D maze. Because the ship can rotate in any 
direction and the rooms have no clearly deﬁ ned ﬂ oors or ceilings, it is easy to become
disoriented. The same room can look quite different from different camera angles.
In 3D combat games, enemies can hide behind doors and around corners in a way 
that is not possible in 2D games. They can also sneak up on the avatar from behind,
although there is some debate about whether this is fair to the player. In 2D games, 
the player can always see what’s coming. In practice, this means that 3D games 
have greater opportunities to startle and surprise the player, which has been used 
to great effect in survival horror games.
CONTEXT-SENSITIVE MODELS
The context-sensitive camera model is becoming increasingly popular in action 
games. In this model, the camera moves around depending on the circumstances 
of the moment, controlled by AI. One of the best examples of this comes from Ico,
shown in Figure 13.7. The camera, seeking to provide the best angle from which to 
show the action, changes its angle as the avatar moves from room to room. This 
works well for slower games, but in fast games, especially if the player is ﬁ ghting for 
his life, it is a distraction. If the camera moves—especially if it jumps suddenly—
the player becomes disoriented and is likely to make mistakes. Context-sensitive 
perspectives are great for offering visual variety, but in high-speed action you 
should stick to more ﬁ xed and predictable points of view.
FIGURE 13.7 
The camera in Ico
moves continuously to 
display the avatar from 
the best angle. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

414 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
User Interface
The user interface for action games should be, as Einstein said of physics, “as simple 
as possible, but not simpler.” Players must be able to quickly and accurately assess 
the play environment, and for that you need to keep distractions to a minimum. 
Controls must be responsive, predictable, and easy to learn. This section looks at 
some user interface features that you can use to meet these requirements.
VISUAL AND AUDIO INDICATORS
Not only does the player have to contend with the frantic action in your game, he 
also has to pay attention to the indicators in the user interface. He should be able to 
do this at a glance without having to work to interpret the data. Follow these sug-
gestions in order to help your player understand what he’s seeing.
■ Display only as much as the player needs to know. Most action games require 
only a limited amount of information, so this isn’t difﬁ cult. For example, the HUD 
(head-up display) for Quake III shows the minimum amount of information: the 
player’s current health, weapon, and amount of ammo.
■ Keep it on-screen. All the vital information that the player needs should be 
immediately visible. Don’t require the player to switch to another screen to learn 
something important; it destroys his concentration. 
■ Where possible, use graphical indicators rather than numbers or text. In an 
action game, players seldom need to know exact quantities. It takes more mental 
processing power to recognize a number than it does to understand a simple power 
bar or gauge. See the section “Feedback Elements” in Chapter 8, “Using Interfaces,” 
for more details.
■ Draw attention to critical information. The player can’t be watching his indi-
cators all the time, so warn him when critical resources run low. To draw the player’s
attention to something in the status panel, make it blink or ﬂ icker. On the periph-
ery of our ﬁ eld of vision, the eye is attuned to detect changes in contrast or color, 
so the easiest way to get the player’s attention is to use a ﬂ ashing or ﬂ ickering indi-
cator. Don’t rely solely on color changes, however, as this handicaps colorblind 
players. See “Colorblind Players” in Appendix A, “Designing to Appeal to Particular 
Groups.”
■ Keep maps in the primary gameplay mode simple and clean. If you are plan-
ning to give the player a map in the primary gameplay mode—and it’s often a good 
idea—it must be as immediately comprehensible as any other indicator. If your map 
needs to be complicated for some reason, make it available in a separate mode that 
pauses the action while the player studies the map.
■ Use plenty of audio feedback. Players depend heavily on their ears to warn 
them of approaching dangers and to let them know when they’ve succeeded at a 
challenge or obtained something valuable. In the middle of fast action, they might 
not see it, so make sure they can hear it as well. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACTION GAMES 
415
 CHAPTER 13
CHARACTERS AND OBJECTS
In action games, the player’s avatar must be extremely easy to pick out. FPS games, 
in which the avatar is not displayed on-screen, don’t present this problem, but in 
other action games, the avatar may show up in a clutter of other graphics. The ava-
tar must be distinctive, with a unique shape, color, or position on-screen. Lara 
Croft, for example, wears a distinctive shirt in a teal blue used nowhere else in 
Tomb Raider. If the player can see a splash of that particular blue on the screen, 
then he knows he is looking at Lara. 
Quickly identifying enemies is equally important. The majority of action games 
use color schemes that indicate enemies, extending the idea of the avatar’s unique 
color so that enemies, too, follow a common scheme of color or appearance. In the 
ﬁ lm Tron, you can easily identify the bad guys because they’re the ones in red; the 
good guys wear blue.
Two-dimensional scrolling games frequently use position to distinguish the avatar. 
In these games, the world moves around the avatar, which remains in the same 
absolute position, or at least on the same horizontal or vertical line, on-screen,
giving players a ﬁ xed point of reference by which they can orient themselves.
CONTROLS
Action games (with the exception of ﬁ ghting games) require simple controls. 
Because of the fast pace of these games, the physical act of using the controls 
should, wherever possible, directly translate to avatar action—pushing left on the 
controls makes the avatar go left, pushing right makes the avatar go right, and so 
on. For 2D games, this is simple to design, but for ﬁ rst- or third-person 3D games, 
the third dimension complicates matters. Until recently, all input devices—
joysticks, mice, D-pads, and so on—have allowed input in only two dimensions,
so movement in the third dimension had to be controlled by separate—usually 
binary—buttons, which is less convenient. Nintendo’s Wii controller can input 
control data in three dimensions.
Some action games have attempted to implement more complex control schemes 
for 3D movement. The success of these games depends on the lengths to which 
players are prepared to go to learn the system. Games that succeed in this are usu-
ally the games that set the standards for new genres. For example, the Doom and 
Quake modes of interaction for FPS games are ubiquitous nowadays, but they’re still 
by no means simple for a beginner. 
As already mentioned, the user interface for ﬁ ghting games presents more difﬁ -
culty. Moves such as walking, kicking, and punching may be straightforward, but 
for the more complex and rewarding combo moves, the player must perform a long 
string of commands in the correct sequence. Because the commands bear no rela-
tion to the actual move executed, players ﬁ nd them harder to learn and remember.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

