418 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
6. Will enemies appear in waves? Will there be monster generators or wildcard ene-
mies to break up the regular progression of the waves?
7. Will the game be broken into levels? What things will make one level different 
from another (landscape, enemies, speed, perspective, and so on)? What about the 
aesthetic style of things such as music and architecture? Will levels end with 
bosses?
8. How will the avatar’s life be managed: as ﬁ xed numbers of lives, energy bars, or 
some combination? Can the player obtain more lives? If so, how?
9. What powerups will there be, if any? For each one you plan to incorporate, do 
the following: state what it does, what it looks like, what it sounds like when acti-
vated, how or where it is to be found or obtained, how common or rare it is, how 
long its effect lasts, and how the player will be able to identify it (by sight and the 
sound it makes).
10. Will the game give the player clues that allow him to anticipate challenges, or 
must the player depend entirely on trial and error to learn his way through?
11. Does the game involve exploring unknown territory? If so, how linear or nonlin-
ear will it be? 
12. Is there a feature that prevents the player from having to start over from the 
beginning? What is it—saving and reloading, checkpoints, or something else?
13. Is the player going to collect anything, in either large or small numbers? Can 
collected items be exchanged for anything useful, or is the player awarded any-
thing when particular thresholds are reached?
14. Is there a scoring mechanism? If so, how is it computed? Does it serve any func-
tion besides giving the player a record of achievement?
15. What locked doors will there be, and what keys will open them?
16. Will the game have, or need, a tutorial mode? If not, how steep do you want the 
learning curve to be?
17. Does the game have a victory condition other than simple survival? What is it?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 CHAPTER 14
Strategy Games
This is a war universe. War all the time. That is its nature. There may be other universes 
based on all sorts of other principles, but ours seems to be based on war and games.
—WILLIAM BURROUGHS
Strategy games are among the oldest in the world. Tradition puts the invention of 
Go at around 2200 BC. The Royal Game of Ur, whose board and counters are on 
display in the British Museum in London, dates to around 2500 BC, although 
nobody knows what the rules were—it might only have been a game of chance.
This chapter discusses how the principles of game design apply to strategy games, 
concentrating on the most popular subgenre, war games. It begins with a formal 
deﬁ nition of strategy games and then addresses in detail the features that charac-
terize them. Next we’ll examine the types of challenges they typically offer and the 
actions that the players may take to meet those challenges. The bulk of the chapter, 
however, is devoted to the core mechanics of strategy games: designing the units 
themselves; creating special capabilities, upgrades, and technology trees; and han-
dling logistics issues. We’ll also look at the different kinds of game worlds that war 
games are frequently set in. The chapter ends with a brief look at the various ways 
that programmers can implement artiﬁ cial opponents in strategy games. Designers 
don’t normally do the programming, but you should be familiar with the common 
programming techniques.
What Are Strategy Games?
Strategy games challenge the player to achieve victory through planning, and spe-
ciﬁ cally through planning a series of actions taken against one or more opponents. 
This deﬁ nition distinguishes strategy games from puzzle games that call for plan-
ning in the absence of conﬂ ict, and from competitive construction and management
simulations that require planning but not direct action against an opponent. 
Strategy games often include the reduction of enemy forces as a key goal, so most 
strategy games are war games in greater or lesser degrees of abstraction. Checkers 
(draughts), for example, is an abstract war game; Risk is slightly less abstract; and 
Axis and Allies, a board game about World War II, is fairly representational. 
However, not all strategy games focus on combat. The games Cathedral and Go are 
about surrounding and capturing territory; Hex and TwixT are about making a con-
tinuous line of pieces across a board; and of course tic-tac-toe (noughts and crosses) 
is about getting three symbols in a row.
CHAPTER 14
419


--- PAGE BREAK ---

420 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
STRATEGY GAME A strategy game is one in which the majority of challenges presented 
are strategic conﬂ ict challenges and the player may choose from a large variety of 
potential actions or moves at most points in the game. Victory is attained by superior 
planning and taking the optimum actions; the element of chance must not play a large 
role. Other challenges, such as tactical, logistical, economic, and exploration challenges, 
may also be present. Physical coordination challenges play little or no part.
Strategy games, with their long history of play with dice, cards, and boards, natu-
rally developed into PC games. (Console efforts so far have been few and far 
between.) The computer provides the power to impartially manage complex rule-
sets, a task that would detract from the fun if the player had to do the work.
Strategy games are more symmetric than the games in other genres and so are 
somewhat easier to balance for difﬁ culty. The resources and actions available to 
each side are, if not identical, generally similar. You can adjust the strengths and 
weaknesses of each side and study the probable outcomes of particular battles with 
statistical analysis even before writing any code. Contrast this with action games in 
which one avatar must ﬁ ght a horde of enemies or adventure games in which the 
player must solve a number of puzzles of varying difﬁ culty. In those genres, it is 
considerably harder to predict what the player will ﬁ nd difﬁ cult.
Game Features
Strategy games fall into two main subgenres: classical turn-based games and real-
time strategy games. Pure strategy games (those that contain only conﬂ ict 
challenges, with no economic or physical challenges) tend to be turn-based rather 
than operating in real time. In a turn-based game, players may mull over their 
moves, considering the beneﬁ ts of one choice over another. In board games, this 
can result in frustrating “analysis paralysis” in which one player spends a large 
amount of time considering each move while the others have to wait. In single-
player computer games, this doesn’t matter—the computer doesn’t mind waiting. 
Multiplayer turn-based computer games are often designed so that all the players 
choose their next move simultaneously, and the machine computes and displays 
the outcome of their actions. This cuts down substantially on the waiting time.
Real-time strategy (RTS) games developed after turn-based games. RTSs added time 
pressure to strategy games because everything happens at once and players do not 
have individual turns to ponder their moves. Though they’re not as frenetic as 
action games, RTSs require the player to keep a sharp lookout and to think quickly.
Many books have been written about games such as chess and Risk, so we don’t 
spend much time on abstract strategy games or those with simple rules. The vast 
majority of computerized strategy games are representational war games with com-
plex core mechanics, so that is where we focus our attention.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
421
 CHAPTER 14
A STRATEGY GAME OF DIPLOMACY: BALANCE OF POWER
Chris Crawford’s Balance of Power ranks among the most brilliant games of diplomatic 
strategy ever created. The setting is the Cold War between the United States and the 
USSR. You take one side or the other and try to increase your own nation’s geopolitical 
prestige and sphere of inﬂ uence at the expense of your opponent by supporting the gov-
ernments of friendly smaller countries and destabilizing or even overthrowing the 
governments of unfriendly ones. The actions you can take include giving economic aid to 
friendly countries, pressuring unfriendly ones through threats, signing defense and other 
treaties, and giving direct military support, including sending in troops. If a smaller 
country has an insurgency or a civil war going on, you can choose which side to support. 
If the government of a hostile country falls and is replaced by a government friendly to 
your side, you gain prestige. The victory condition is a net gain in prestige after eight 
years have passed in the game world.
The real excitement, however, is not in manipulating smaller countries, but in what hap-
pens when the other side ﬁ nds out about it—particularly if you interfere in a country 
that traditionally lies in the other side’s sphere of inﬂ uence. For each action that one 
superpower takes, the other superpower has a chance to object. Whoever initiated the 
action must then decide whether to insist or to back off. These events, called crises, raise 
the stakes enormously; tremendous prestige is lost when one side backs down in a crisis. 
However, if you push your opponents too far, the result is a nuclear war that instantly 
ends the game. The trick is to know when you are on ﬁ rm ground and when you had bet-
ter let the other side have its way. It’s poker with nuclear weapons.
Each side has limited resources with which to undertake its activities. The game is asym-
metric; the United States has more money, while the Soviets have more troops. More 
subtle tactics, such as signing treaties and diplomatic pressure, don’t cost anything but 
aren’t as effective. At the highest difﬁ culty level, however, they are really the only way to 
win; sending arms and troops is too likely to provoke a holocaust.
Balance of Power simulates geopolitics with a depth and subtlety never before seen in a 
computer game and it is so good that, for a brief time, the U.S. State Department used it 
to train diplomats. Crawford has written an excellent book called Balance of Power: 
International Politics as the Ultimate Global Game that describes the core mechanics of 
the game in detail, right down to the equations that govern particular behaviors 
(Crawford, 1986). The book is out of print but is available online in ASCII format; see 
“References.”
Challenges
As the deﬁ nition says, strategy games may include economic and exploration chal-
lenges, but strategic conﬂ ict generally dominates in strategy games. A game that 
includes only economic challenges without any ﬁ ghting is more properly a 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

422 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
construction and management simulation. For example, exploration and growth 
do feature in StarCraft, but only to enable the player to ﬁ ght more effectively; play-
ers must explore the area to be conquered and set up resource-processing factories 
for converting resources into troops and vehicles.
STRATEGIC CONFLICT
Conﬂ ict is most often characterized as combat between groups of individual com-
batants; by long tradition, these combatants are known as units. A unit can be 
anything from an ancient Egyptian warrior to a Napoleonic cavalryman to an 
imaginary spacecraft. Not all units ﬁ ght; some can be used for transport, scouting, 
or other purposes. Units also need not be movable; a ﬁ xed gun emplacement is still 
a unit. In most modern war games, specialized units, often portrayed as buildings, 
are used to produce new ﬁ ghting units. These buildings generally don’t move and 
don’t ﬁ ght, but they can be destroyed if attacked and perhaps can be repaired by 
repair units. Although it is not an industry standard term, this chapter refers to 
such buildings as factories. In general, the term units will mean ﬁ ghting units, not 
factories.
The main characteristic that distinguishes units and factories from anything else 
on the battleﬁ eld is that they are under a player’s control and provide some beneﬁ t 
to him, so if they die or are destroyed, that beneﬁ t is lost to the player. Units may 
be atomic, with no individually distinguishable parts (such as an infantry soldier 
with a riﬂ e), or compound, with separate parts that can be added and removed and 
perhaps destroyed without completely destroying the whole unit (such as a large 
ship with many guns). Each unit behaves according to particular performance 
characteristics, such as how long it can survive when under attack, how rapidly it 
can ﬁ re a weapon, or how fast it can move. The later section “Core Mechanics” dis-
cusses these attributes in more detail.
To give the player interesting options, almost all war games offer the player a 
choice of different kinds of units. In chess, there are six kinds; in more representa-
tional games, there may be dozens. Checkers starts with only one kind of unit, but 
later in the game a new kind can appear, a king.
Most war games seek to reproduce the classic situations and tactics of military com-
bat, whether at particular points in history or in imaginary conﬂ icts. Depending 
on the degree of realism offered, tactics can include ﬂ anking maneuvers, sneak 
attacks, creating diversions, cutting off enemy supply lines, killing the superior 
ofﬁ cers to leave the troops without leadership, taking advantage of the effects of 
bad weather, and so on. In order for the player to use these tactics, the units and 
the rules of the game have to be designed in such a way as to support them. If you 
want your game to include sneak attacks, for instance, you will have to include a 
mechanism that hides the enemy’s movements from the player. Obviously on some 
level the computer knows everything that is happening, but you can design the 
computer’s AI to ignore the player’s movements if the software determines that the 
player’s units are not visible to the computer’s troops.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
423
 CHAPTER 14
ALTERNATIVES TO COMBAT
Conﬂ ict does not necessarily involve physical combat. Whereas RTS games and 
simpler strategy games tend to focus on combat, more advanced games include ele-
ments of diplomacy, crisis management, and espionage. For example, in Civilization 
III, the response of the enemy leaders to diplomatic overtures depends in large part 
on whether the player has the force to back up her tough words. Of course, diplo-
macy isn’t all about threatening enemies—it also allows the player to form alliances 
that can avert war and encourage trade.
Diplomacy and espionage suit a slower-paced strategy game, one designed to be 
played over a long period of time. The extra nuance and depth that diplomacy adds 
to an otherwise standard strategy game is well worth the extra time and effort 
spent designing and implementing a full-ﬂ edged system of diplomats and spies. 
Diplomacy gives the player an extra degree of freedom that allows her to create 
more devious and interesting game plans than would be possible otherwise.
Strategy games nevertheless tend to reward aggressive measures more than they do 
peaceful ones because war is easier to model than diplomacy and is more exciting 
to watch. The consequences of war are presented as less dire than they are in the 
real world, and the goal of the game is often domination of the world, not peaceful 
coexistence. It would be interesting to see a strategy game whose goal was to avert 
war and promote prosperity; the player’s role would perhaps be the secretary-
general of the United Nations.
EXPLORATION CHALLENGES
Exploration lets players investigate unknown terrain in a game world. As a designer, 
you may give the player new worlds or make creative use of the familiar world. 
Consider X-COM: UFO Defense, which depicts the secretive invasion of Earth by 
aliens. Players are of course familiar with the map of the Earth, but the location of 
hidden alien bases and UFO landing sites is a mystery until the player sends out a 
squad of soldiers to investigate.
X-COM presents the player with a landscape shrouded in darkness, a darkness that 
dissipates only when the player’s soldiers enter an area. This technique is used in 
most strategy games involving exploration to increase their difﬁ culty. If the terrain 
is generally ﬂ at, you can decide that the area to be revealed is simply a circle of a 
certain diameter around a unit, but in hilly terrain you may wish to compute the 
actual lines of sight for the units so that enemy units behind hills or other obstruc-
tions remain hidden. The level design in many single-player war games uses the 
player’s ignorance of the landscape heavily; to win a level, for instance, the player 
may have to explore enough to ﬁ nd some key feature, such as a bridge over an 
impassable river or a back way to sneak up on the computer player’s headquarters.
Games often present territory that has been explored—but is not currently 
patrolled by the player’s forces—as dim, with only landscape details and no 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

424 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
information about the presence of enemy units. These two techniques—unexplored 
regions shown in black and explored but unpatrolled regions shown dimly—are 
collectively known as the fog of war. Figure 14.1 shows the bright area currently
visible to the player, the dimmed area that has been explored but is not currently 
visible (due to lack of troops there to provide intelligence), and the black bulk of 
the land that remains unexplored.
The fog of war lends realism and excitement to the game. Because the player can-
not see what is happening in areas where he has no troops, he could be attacked 
unexpectedly if he does not take appropriate defensive measures. These games 
reward those who set up guard units to warn of impending invasions and those 
who send out scouts to ﬁ nd out where the enemy is.
Hiding the unexplored landscape itself, however, is completely unrealistic in any 
game set after about the year 1500. Armies haven’t had to ﬁ ght wars without a map 
of the terrain for several centuries. Games continue to hide the landscape from the 
player because the task of exploring makes the game more challenging. In a lot of 
games, if the player can see the landscape clearly, he is able to plan more effectively 
and therefore win more quickly. Many games also cheat, hiding the landscape from 
the player but allowing the computer’s AI to see it. This gives the computer an 
advantage that the player does not have and helps to compensate if the AI isn’t very 
good in the ﬁ rst place. It’s a design solution to a programming problem: weak AI.
FIGURE 14.1 
The fog of war from 
Civilization III


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
425
 CHAPTER 14
ECONOMIC CHALLENGES
The sinews of war: a limitless supply of money.
 
 
—CICERO
Strategy games such as chess give the players a ﬁ xed number of units at the begin-
ning of the game, and the players make do with what they’ve been given. Other 
games offer a mechanism for acquiring more units as the game goes on, which 
makes the campaign more a process of growth than of attrition. In Risk, for exam-
ple, each player gets a number of new units at the beginning of his turn; the exact 
amount is based on a few easily calculated factors.
Computer strategy games allow for far more complex calculations than a human 
being playing Risk is willing or able to perform. Designers of computer strategy 
games frequently take advantage of this to include a richer internal economy for 
the player to manage. Rather than starting with a large number of units at the 
beginning of a level, the player has to obtain some resource—let’s assume it’s 
gold—that the player can convert to units later on. This lets the player decide when 
to buy the units and what sorts of units to purchase, and therefore, offers her 
greater freedom to ﬁ ght the battle in whatever way she prefers.
You can supply the players with a limited amount of gold at the beginning of a 
level and put more gold out in the landscape for them to discover. These locations, 
or mines, can produce either a limited or an unlimited amount of gold. If mines 
produce an unlimited amount, the game could, in principle, go on forever; if not, 
the game must eventually come to an end as the resource runs out.
PREVENTING RESOURCE RUSHES
Strategy games that place resources, such as gold, in the landscape for the players to 
use often turn into rushes to grab the mines. Monopolizing production of resources 
then becomes a dominant strategy, and players avoid trying any other. To prevent this, 
make the map layout fairly symmetrical, with similar amounts of gold near each side’s 
headquarters. If you put mines farther out in the landscape for the players to ﬁ nd, put 
comparatively little gold in them. That makes ﬁ nding one a nice bonus but not a decisive 
advantage.
It is vitally important that the economic productivity of all sides be equally balanced, or 
economic advantages will rapidly outweigh strategic skill. 
More complicated games use several different resources; in fact, if the economy of a 
strategy game becomes complicated enough, the game really turns into a hybrid of 
strategy game and construction and management simulation. The Age of Empires
and Civilization series are both really hybrids, not straight strategy games, though 
we’ll look at the economy within Age of Empires as an example here.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

426 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
In Age of Empires, the player must obtain food, wood, stone, and gold, each from its 
source, worked by units designated for the purpose and brought back to a central 
storage area. The player spends resources to construct factories, and the factories in 
turn produce units (which also consumes resources). The factories effectively form 
the player’s headquarters and must be defended, adding a new conﬂ ict challenge.
Player Actions
In a strategy game, the player’s role is that of a commander or manager, so most 
actions consist of giving orders to units. Each unit responds to commands accord-
ing to the AI programming for that unit or type of unit. Giving an order is usually 
a two-step process: First, the player selects the unit or units that will receive the 
order, generally by clicking on it with the mouse. Then the player issues the order, 
either by clicking somewhere in the landscape, on an enemy unit, or on a button or 
menu item. Here’s a short list of actions and orders commonly occurring in strategy 
games (different games will use different names for them):
■ Move to a given location in the terrain, optionally via a series of waypoints 
marked along the way. The unit uses pathﬁ nding AI to ﬁ nd its way there, taking the 
quickest route while avoiding obstructions.
■ Attack an enemy unit, which includes advancing until the enemy unit is in 
range, then opening ﬁ re, and pursuing if the enemy retreats.
■ Stop moving; this order countermands both attack and movement orders. 
Because the AI for attacking usually pursues an enemy unit to the ends of the earth 
(including right into an ambush), the player frequently needs to issue the stop 
order.
■ Hold a particular position, meaning attack any enemy that comes into range, 
but do not pursue it if it retreats. The unit’s AI may include an automatic tendency 
to attack certain enemies preferentially, or the player may have to manage this 
directly.
■ Establish a formation that is tactically advantageous. Loose infantry formations 
give some protection against archery because a lot of arrows fall into empty space; 
tight formations are best against other infantry. Warships with guns along their 
sides can concentrate their ﬁ repower if several sail in a straight line, head to stern. 
Tanks with guns at the front can do the same if their formation is abreast. You may 
want to include a formation editor in your game that lets the player design forma-
tions that he likes.
■ Produce new units by consuming resources. This can be a command that the 
player gives by choosing a menu item or clicking a button on an overlay, but more 
often, the player gives the command to a speciﬁ c factory whose function is to cre-
ate mobile units.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
427
 CHAPTER 14
You might want to consider variants of these common orders, such as 
■ Retreat, a movement towards safety that leaves the unit more vulnerable while 
moving but goes more quickly than ordinary movement.
■ Dash, a rapid forward movement in which the unit does not attempt to attack 
enemies it encounters but tries to get to its destination as quickly as possible.
■ Patrol, a cyclic movement between two or more designated points, allowing 
units to defend more territory than the hold command permits.
Figure 14.2 is from StarCraft showing, at the lower right of the screen, a menu of 
mouse-clickable icons that correspond to ﬁ ve of these commands. They are, from 
top to bottom and left to right, dash, stop, attack, patrol, and hold. The remaining 
visible icon invokes a special capability of the currently selected unit.
Specialized units have their own special orders, of course: building for construction 
units, heal or repair for medical or repair units, picking up and dropping off troops 
or supplies for transport units, and so on. The next section discusses specialized units.
FIGURE 14.2 
The StarCraft screen, 
with a menu of orders 
at the lower right


--- PAGE BREAK ---

428 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Core Mechanics
Strategy games with simple rules, such as chess, don’t have an internal economy 
because they don’t deal in numeric quantities; either a piece is on the board or it 
isn’t. There is no ﬂ ow of resources to manage, so their core mechanics are uncom-
plicated. (This does not, however, mean that their strategy is uncomplicated.) In 
war games, the internal economy centers on the production and consumption of 
resources such as units and factories and can be very complex indeed.
Designing Units
The units in war games almost always fall into types, such that all units of each 
type share a set of attributes, but some units or types of units will also have special 
capabilities that are unique to them and give them a special role. In this section, 
we’ll examine some design considerations for creating units.
THE ROCK-PAPER-SCISSORS (RPS) MODEL
The Ancient Art of War, an early real-time strategy game, ran on a 4.77 MHz IBM PC. 
The machine did not have enough CPU power to cope with a complex model of 
real-time combat, so the game used only three types of ﬁ ghting units and a simple 
rock-paper-scissors rule to resolve conﬂ ict among them. The unit types were 
knights, archers, and barbarians. (Spies, the fourth type of unit offered, could not 
ﬁ ght.) Knights had an advantage over barbarians; barbarians had an advantage over 
archers; and archers had an advantage over knights. The player’s challenge, as in 
rock-paper-scissors, was to try to anticipate which units his opponent would use 
and deploy the ones most likely to beat them. Units could be deployed in mixed 
groups, and the player could choose different formations for them to ﬁ ght in, 
which made the game more interesting.
While RPS-style models are easy to implement and naturally balanced, they are 
suited only to simple games, and you shouldn’t use these for a modern war game 
with large numbers of unit types. You can’t balance a complex game by simply 
declaring that some units are vulnerable to others; there are too many pairwise 
matchups to consider. These models also don’t take into account battleﬁ eld condi-
tions. What if the knights sneak up on the archers from behind and engage them 
in close combat?
Instead, create numerical attributes that describe the combat strengths and weak-
nesses of unit types independently of whom they may ﬁ ght. The relative combat 
effectiveness of different unit types against each other will then emerge from these 
attributes. This system, described in the next section, permits many more types of 
units and more interesting relationships among them.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
429
 CHAPTER 14
NUMERIC ATTRIBUTES  
Modern war games assign numeric attributes to each type of unit. Each unit of a 
given type begins with the values that its type requires, but these values change as 
the unit sustains damage, consumes ammunition, and so on. The system is similar 
to that used to describe characters in role-playing games. However, RPGs tend to be 
about small numbers of quite diverse individuals, while strategy games tend to be 
about large numbers of fairly similar units. Consequently, RPGs use more attributes 
than strategy games do.
The landscape in which the battles are fought also has attributes that vary from 
place to place and affect the activities of the units present. Forest terrain, for exam-
ple, slows down vehicles moving through it, and deep water is impassable to all 
units except boats. Games set on other worlds with alien landscapes might have 
different dynamics.
The numerical attributes most commonly used in a war game include the following:
■ Health is measured in health points (HP). These are reduced as a unit takes dam-
age. When a unit’s number of health points reaches zero, the unit is considered 
destroyed and therefore disappears from the game. An atomic unit does not have 
any pieces or parts that take damage individually, so it has only one health attri-
bute and all damage is done to it as a whole. Compound units may have separate 
health attributes for each of the different pieces that make them up. (A cavalry 
unit, for example, might have one health attribute for the rider and another for the 
horse.) The maximum amount of health that a given type of unit may have is its 
maximum health. More robust units have a higher maximum health. Some units 
may also have armor, also measured in health points, which can absorb a certain 
amount of damage and protect the unit’s health. Armor, too, will have a maximum
armor value that varies with the unit. You can either let the armor absorb all dam-
age until the armor is destroyed (in which case it’s really just like extra health), or, 
more realistically, you can have the armor let more and more damage get through 
to harm the unit as the armor degrades.
■ Units may have zero or more weapons with which to attack enemy units. (Transport 
units typically have no weapons; tanks typically have three or four, though many 
games limit the number of weapons per unit to one, to make the game simpler.) Each 
weapon has attributes that describe its characteristics. When a weapon hits an enemy 
unit, it reduces that unit’s health or armor by a certain number of health points. A 
weapon inﬂ icts damage in individual instances called shots; the amount of damage 
it does per shot is its shot power, expressed in HP per shot. There must be a minimum 
period of time between shots; the number of shots per minute is the weapon’s rate 
of ﬁ re. (This terminology comes from ﬁ rearms, but the same attributes also apply to 
swinging a sword; some swords do more damage than others, and some can be 
wielded more quickly than others.) If the game models ammunition consumption for 
a certain weapon, then that weapon also has a certain amount of ammo; each shot 
consumes one round, and the weapon ceases to operate when the number reaches zero.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

430 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ Range is the maximum distance at which a weapon can deliver damage. Some 
units have only hand-to-hand combat weapons and can attack only adjacent units, 
so the range of their weapons is small. A few long-range weapons, such as long-
bows, are useless in hand-to-hand combat, and so may also need a minimum range
rating below which they are not functional. Fixed units such as gun emplacements 
cannot always point in all directions; if that is the case, you will need to deﬁ ne a 
traverse arc for the unit, two numbers that indicate the starting and ending bear-
ings. All the bearings between these two constitute an arc through which the 
weapon may be traversed. A traverse arc of 0 to 90 degrees means the unit can ﬁ re 
in any direction between due north and due east.
■ Small projectiles such as bullets and arrows should hit only one enemy unit 
each, but if your game includes large, solid projectiles like cannonballs, you will 
have to deﬁ ne the shot mass and shot velocity of each. Their kinetic energy is great 
enough to let them completely destroy small units and continue onward. The amount 
of damage they can do is reduced in proportion to the mass of the units that they 
have already hit, until they ﬁ nally stop. Explosive projectiles, on the other hand, 
require a blast radius, a measure of the distance from their landing point to the far-
thest point that the explosion can affect; any unit takes damage if it is within the 
blast radius. In principle, the amount of damage done to enemy units within the 
blast radius should be reduced by the inverse square law—that is, the shot power of 
the projectile is reduced in proportion to the square of the target unit’s distance from 
the center of the blast; however, you may not wish to compute to that level of detail.
■ Accuracy is a measure of the chance that a given weapon will hit the point at 
which it is aimed, expressed as a real number between 0 (never hits) and 1 (always 
hits). Note that this is accuracy of aiming at a point, not hitting a unit; if a projec-
tile is slow, the unit may not be there when the projectile arrives, even if the 
weapon is highly accurate. Theoretical accuracy is the average accuracy of a weapon 
under all conditions, but you may also add to or subtract from the theoretical accu-
racy to compute the practical accuracy based on the prevailing conditions when the 
weapon is used, such as the distance to the target, whether it’s daytime or night-
time, and so on.
■ Defensive dodging is a unit’s ability to successfully dodge an enemy shot; you may 
want to restrict its meaning to dodging solid projectiles such as bullets, not blast 
effects. Like accuracy, it should be expressed as a real number between 0 (never dodges) 
and 1 (always dodges). If your physics model is complex enough to include the velocity 
of shots, then defensive dodging should be less effective against faster-moving shots.
■ Units that move have a speed at which they are currently moving and a maximum 
speed that represents the fastest they can move over unrestricted terrain such as a 
road. Their actual speed at a given time degrades because of the difﬁ culty of the ter-
rain through which they are passing (a terrain attribute); difﬁ culty is expressed as a 
real number between 0 (prohibits passage entirely) and 1 (allows maximum speed, 
like a road). Speed should also degrade by moving uphill; the altitude of each point 
in the landscape is another terrain attribute, and the relative altitudes of two adjacent 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
431
 CHAPTER 14
regions give the steepness of the slope between them. Slopes above a certain steep-
ness should be impassable to ordinary ground units.
■ The turn rate describes the rate at which a unit can turn to face a new direction; 
this applies both to moving and ﬁ xed units. The turn rate should not be so quick 
that the turn is instantaneous, or ﬂ anking maneuvers won’t work.
■ If you are making a highly realistic strategy game about vehicles such as tanks, 
you might also want to include the unit’s mass, acceleration, and so on, but most 
strategy games don’t bother. Without taking mass and acceleration into account, 
units don’t speed up and slow down, they simply start to move at the maximum rate 
they can over the terrain, and they stop as soon as they receive a stop command.
■ If your game includes the fog of war, you will need to include a number that 
describes a unit’s range of vision; scouting units might have a larger number for this 
than other units. This value will naturally be modiﬁ ed by the altitude of the land 
relative to the region around it.
Note that accuracy and defensive dodging introduce an element of chance into the 
game. To determine if a weapon hits or misses the point it is aimed at, the software 
must choose a random number between 0 and 1; if the random number chosen is 
below the weapon’s accuracy rating, it shoots accurately; if the random number is 
above it, it misses. Obviously if the weapon’s accuracy rating is 1, it is completely 
accurate. You then have to determine whether a unit being shot at dodges the shot 
successfully (even if it is an accurate shot) by choosing another random number 
and comparing it to the target’s defensive dodging ability.
Naturally, the preceding is not an exhaustive list of attributes, but it covers the 
basics. If we apply this list to The Ancient Art of War mentioned earlier, the knights 
and barbarians have only close-combat weapons while archers have only a long-
range weapon; barbarians have high defensive dodging (making them less 
vulnerable to archers), whereas knights have low defensive dodging (making them 
more vulnerable to archers); and knights have more armor and more shot power 
than barbarians, making them superior to barbarians in hand-to-hand combat. In 
other words, numeric attributes can duplicate the artiﬁ cial rock-paper-scissors rela-
tionships of The Ancient Art of War, and they can create much more complex and 
subtle relationships as well.
DESIGN RULE No Invincible Units!
Avoid designing any unit whose weapon range and maximum speed attributes are both 
greater than the range and speed of any enemy unit it may face. Such a unit has the speed 
to stay permanently out of range of its opponents and can shoot them with impunity. If it 
is sufﬁ ciently outnumbered, its opponents may be able to trap it; but such a maneuver 
often requires better AI than most strategy games can manage. A unit that is invincible in 
a one-on-one conﬂ ict with every type of enemy unit will unbalance your game.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

432 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
SPECIAL CAPABILITIES  
Many units in strategy games have special capabilities that strongly affect the tac-
tics and strategy of play. Some special capabilities inﬂ uence the attributes of a unit; 
others simply allow the unit to do things that other units cannot. Here is a short 
list of possibilities:
■ Stealth. A stealth unit can become invisible to enemy units. This capacity is 
extremely valuable because it enables the unit to sneak past guards posted by the 
enemy and attack a vulnerable point. Designers traditionally require stealth units 
to reveal themselves when they use their weapons. Units able to attack while 
remaining invisible would be too powerful. Some designers reserve stealth capabil-
ity for unarmed units, which serve as scouts.
■ Flying or sailing, that is, traversing terrain inaccessible to ordinary land-based 
units. Aircraft and ships tend to be specialized and incapable of operating in any 
other medium, but there is no reason you cannot create amphibious craft if you 
want to.
■ Repair. You can design units to repair themselves; you can also devise special 
units that repair others—essentially, medical units. This valuable feature rewards 
players who keep a sharp eye on the health of their units and set up systems to 
repair them efﬁ ciently. The repair feature is especially beneﬁ cial if new units cost 
resources to manufacture, but repairs cost nothing or at least, less than building a 
new unit.
■ Transport. Transport units allow the rapid conveyance of a certain number of 
other units around the landscape. Destroying a transport unit destroys the units it 
carries as well. Because rapid transport is a valuable feature, designers often make 
transport units unarmed, to offset this strength by increasing the transport units’ 
vulnerability. This requires the player to assign armed units to go with them in a 
convoy, which lends realism to the game.
■ Constructing buildings and producing mobile units. As the earlier section 
“Strategic Conﬂ ict” describes, most modern war games use a construction unit to 
build and repair factories, and the factory constructs other mobile units, often of a 
speciﬁ c type.
■ Leadership. Some games, especially those that represent ancient warfare, 
include special leader units that give a ﬁ ghting bonus to other units near them or 
under their command. This bonus is lost if the leader is killed, thus simulating the 
loss of morale and organization that occurs in those circumstances.
For every special capability you create for one side in a battle, you must also create 
a capability of similar military value for the other side or a means of defeating the 
special capability. If you give one side stealth units, you should either give the 
other side something equally useful or give them special units that can detect 
stealth units. The special capabilities of either side need not be symmetric—
Carthaginians use war elephants and Romans use catapults—but there must be a 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
433
 CHAPTER 14
balance between them. Otherwise one side will exploit its advantage ruthlessly and 
the game will be no fun.
COMPUTING THE RELATIVE VALUE OF UNITS
If your game allows the player to purchase or construct new units, you will have to 
decide on the relative cost of each type of unit, either in terms of the amount of 
time that the player will have to wait for it, the resources required to purchase it, or 
both. A unit’s cost should be a function of its military value. Of course, the value of 
a unit depends a lot on the conditions in which it ﬁ ghts; snowmobiles are useless 
in the desert, and infantry can’t do much against jet aircraft. However, you’ll still 
need some kind of baseline for determining how much a unit is worth in absolute 
terms, regardless of circumstances or what it’s up against, so that each side will pay 
roughly the same amount for the same amount of military effectiveness.
Following are two equations that serve as a ﬁ rst approximation of the military 
effectiveness, and therefore the value, of a unit type. The ﬁ rst is for units designed 
primarily for attack.
Attack Unit Value = maximum health × shot power × rate of ﬁ re ×
theoretical accuracy × range × maximum speed
Very roughly, this equation reﬂ ects a unit’s ability to accurately deliver damage 
from a distance, while surviving under ﬁ re itself. So, in comparing two types of 
attack units, if all the factors are equal except for maximum health, the one with 
the greater health survives longer under ﬁ re and therefore does more damage to the 
enemy before it is destroyed. Likewise, if two units are identical except for their rate 
of ﬁ re, the one that ﬁ res faster does more damage before it is destroyed. Speed is 
included because it is a measure of a unit’s ability to get out of the range of another 
enemy’s weapons. Any unit that is faster than an enemy can get in and out of 
harm’s way quickly, allowing hit-and-run operations.
Defensive units such as ﬁ xed gun emplacements use a slightly different equation:
Defense Unit Value = maximum health × shot power × rate of ﬁ re × 
× theoretical accuracy × range 2
2
Speed is left out because such units don’t move much and don’t generally need to; 
they’re supposed to protect the place where they are. The range is squared because 
a longer range means more than being able to shoot farther away; it means being 
able to deliver ﬁ re on an area of terrain, and the area is proportional to the square of 
the range. It is divided by two because most of the time, the enemy is in front of the 
unit, not behind it; being able to cover the area behind the unit is less valuable.
Warning: These equations produce completely different ranges of values and cannot be 
used to compare the value of attacking units with defensive units. They’re only intended 
to compare attacking units to other attacking units and defensive units to other 
defensive units. The equations are only a ﬁ rst approximation, and you will almost 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

434 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
certainly want to attach weights to the various factors they include. The equations 
also don’t take into account special capabilities such as stealth or leadership. A unit 
with a special capability should cost more than a unit that is otherwise identical but 
lacks that capability, but there is no rule of thumb for determining just how much 
more it should cost. Only play-testing and tuning can produce a balanced set of units 
for all sides in the war. Be sure to read the section “Avoiding Dominant Strategies” 
in Chapter 11, “Game Balancing,” before setting attributes for your units.
PRODUCTION RATES, UNIT NUMBERS, AND LANCHESTER’S LAWS
Frederick William Lanchester founded the ﬁ eld of operations research, which stud-
ies subjects such as logistics and production efﬁ ciency. In the course of his work, he 
devised two laws regarding the relative strengths of enemy forces. One, Lanchester’s
Linear Law, states that in hand-to-hand combat the relative strengths of two armies 
are simply proportional to their numbers of troops. Since one ﬁ ghter can only ever 
engage one other ﬁ ghter at a time, the force relationship is a simple one.
His other law, Lanchester’s Square Law, refers to the relative strengths of forces 
made up of units that can aim and shoot at one another from a distance and can 
concentrate their ﬁ re. In this case, the strength differential is not proportional to 
the sizes of the forces but to the square of their sizes. Imagine two forces, Red and 
Blue, both made up of identical units. Blue has three times as many units as Red 
has. It seems as if Blue is three times as strong as Red. But in fact, it’s nine times as 
strong. Here’s why: Three Blue units are concentrating their ﬁ repower on each Red 
unit. But Red’s ﬁ repower is also diluted over a force three times as big. Each Red unit 
is ﬁ ring at only one Blue unit, and two other Blue units aren’t being ﬁ red upon at 
all! The combined effect is that Blue is nine times as strong.
What this means in practice is that masses of concentrated ﬁ repower are not only 
effective, they’re very, very effective. For strategy games, this means that if you give 
one side twice as many units as the other, you’re actually giving it four times the 
advantage. You’re unlikely to do this intentionally, but it might happen by accident 
if you don’t set the production rates of units carefully. If one side can produce units 
faster than the other, its advantage is not the difference between the numbers of 
units but the square of the difference—assuming that we’re talking about units 
with ranged weapons. Hand-to-hand units still follow Lanchester’s Linear Law.
This also means that you can’t balance the effect of one side’s having twice as 
many units by giving the other side a twofold advantage in one of its units’ attri-
butes. Even if you double the smaller side’s shot power, those shots are still being 
diluted over a larger force. You have to give the smaller side a fourfold advantage in 
shot power to compensate for the larger side’s squared numerical advantage.
Lanchester’s laws describe battle in abstract terms. They don’t take into account 
battleﬁ eld conditions, maneuvering, reinforcements, and so on. Nevertheless, they 
serve as a valuable warning to game designers trying to balance strategy games: 
NOTE Some strategy 
games implement unit 
AI such that when a 
group of units ﬁ res 
on another group, 
the attackers will all 
concentrate their ﬁ re 
on the weakest enemy 
ﬁ rst before moving on 
to the next. This takes 
the enemy out of action 
more quickly, and 
reduces the dilution 
effect somewhat.
NOTE Lanchester 
was actually writ-
ing about aerial 
dogﬁ ghting among 
propeller-powered 
ﬁ ghter planes. These 
are very “pure” battle-
ﬁ eld conditions: There 
is no terrain to take 
advantage of (except for 
clouds) and no oppor-
tunity for resupply.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
435
 CHAPTER 14
Numbers and production rates make a huge difference. It’s critically important to 
balance your production economy well, or whichever player can turn out units 
faster—even if those units are relatively weak—can overwhelm the other by sheer 
numbers.
For a somewhat more thorough discussion of Lanchester’s laws, see the “Designer’s 
Notebook” column “Kicking Butt by the Numbers” on the Gamasutra webzine 
(Adams, 2004).
Health, Morale, and Fighting Efﬁ ciency
As with almost all other genres, units in war games ﬁ ght at full efﬁ ciency until 
their health points are gone even though that’s obviously unrealistic. Making 
wounded or damaged units ﬁ ght at reduced efﬁ ciency introduces too powerful an 
effect of positive feedback in favor of the dominant side. Once a unit’s efﬁ ciency 
begins to suffer, it’s more likely to take further damage and so lose yet more efﬁ -
ciency, resulting in a quick demise. Reducing the ﬁ ghting efﬁ ciency of damaged 
units also produces situations in which each side has harmed the other to the point 
that neither is able to ﬁ ght effectively. The result is a long stalemate or a boring war 
of attrition, so in general, you should avoid this approach.
The same is true of most mechanisms that try to implement the effects of morale. 
In such systems, morale is represented by a number that either increases or 
decreases an army’s ﬁ ghting effectiveness. If the number is positive, morale is high 
and the effectiveness goes up, perhaps by improving the weapons accuracy of all 
the units in the army. If the number is negative, morale is low and effectiveness is 
harmed. Morale goes up when the army is doing well (that is, losing fewer units rel-
ative to the enemy) and down if it is doing badly (losing a lot of units).
Again, this tight loop produces too much positive feedback. If one side starts to lose 
units, morale is lowered, ﬁ ghting effectiveness goes down, and so that side keeps on 
losing. Furthermore, the enemy’s morale has gone up at the same time, making the 
problem even worse. It’s better to avoid morale altogether or to give it only a small 
role in determining ﬁ ghting effectiveness. The leadership bonus, mentioned in the 
earlier section “Special Capabilities” is a better way to handle this; the value of the 
bonus is not based on how well the army is doing but on whether the leader is pres-
ent, so there is no feedback loop.
In conﬂ icts among small numbers of compound units, such as main battle tanks
or capital ships, you may want to allow individual weapons or other systems aboard 
the unit to go out of commission as the unit takes damage. In a game about
nineteenth-century naval warfare, for example, you can allow the guns aboard a 
74-gun ship to be destroyed one by one, thus incrementally reducing the ﬁ ghting 
capacity of the whole. The guns on a ship are analogous to the soldiers in an army, 
and like a soldier, each gun should ﬁ ght at full strength until its hit points are gone.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

436 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Upgrades and Technology Trees
In a game with a limited number of unit types, the players can sometimes exhaust 
the interesting battle combinations too quickly. For example, the knights, archers, 
and barbarians of The Ancient Art of War aren’t enough to hold players’ attention 
over many campaigns. You can make a game more interesting by adding more unit 
types, but if all the unit types are available at the beginning of a game, the player will 
undoubtedly concentrate on the most powerful ones and ignore the weaker ones.
To resolve this problem, you should look for a way to introduce new units or to 
upgrade the existing ones as the game progresses. These upgrades can improve the 
values of units’ attributes or give the units entirely new capabilities. An upgrade 
might occur as a reward for some achievement. In checkers, for example, moving a 
piece to the opposite side of the board turns that piece from an ordinary unit that 
can only move forward into a king that can move both forward and backward. 
Because it takes a while to reach the opposite side of the board, kings don’t appear 
until well into the game.
RESEARCHING UPGRADES  
Checkers is an abstract game with an arbitrary rule for upgrading units. In more 
representational games, the unit upgrade process is often characterized as a form of 
research that the player must initiate; it takes a certain amount of time and perhaps 
the expenditure of some resources. If your game offers several different upgrades, 
you may wish to organize them into a sequence, such that some upgrades become 
available only after others have been achieved. You may also offer the player a 
choice of upgrades to research at any given time, which gives her an interesting 
decision to make: Which is the most advantageous upgrade to choose given the 
units she has available and her preferred style of play? (A player who prefers a 
defensive style, for example, may wish to choose upgrades that enhance the defen-
sive rather than the offensive capabilities of her units.)
SINGLE-UNIT, UNIT TYPE, AND GLOBAL UPGRADES  
You may create a number of different types of upgrades: those that apply to a single 
unit (such as the conversion of a piece to a king, as in checkers); those that modify 
the capabilities of all units of a given type (such as the siege tank upgrade in StarCraft,
which gives all tanks the ability to operate in siege-tank mode once the upgrade 
has been researched); and those that modify the core mechanics globally (such as 
the Hoover Dam invention in Civilization, which improves its entire society’s pro-
ductivity and reduces pollution). In role-playing games, skill upgrades naturally 
apply only to the individual character that has learned the skill, but in strategy 
games it is more common to apply a unit type upgrade to all the player’s units of 
that type simultaneously. That makes the process of retroﬁ tting the existing units 
unnecessary, so the player doesn’t have to think about it. If you’re making a highly 
representational war game, however, you may want to require the existing units to 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
437
 CHAPTER 14
come back to headquarters to ﬁ t them with their new gun, engine, radio, or what-
ever other feature it is that the player has researched.
PERMANENT AND TEMPORARY UPGRADES
In turn-based games with long, complex campaigns (such as Civilization or X-COM), 
designers often spread the upgrades out over time, spanning several levels. Each 
time an upgrade is achieved, it lasts for the rest of the game. These permanent 
upgrades strongly support the player’s sense of progression through an extended 
game. They typically occur only infrequently and represent a major achievement 
when accomplished. Permanent upgrades are ideal for game-time periods that span 
months or years.
In RTS games, however, you may want to have the research and upgrade process 
work fast enough to produce big changes in the gameplay within a single level but 
not fast enough to carry over to the next level. These are called temporary upgrades.
This puts more pressure on the player, who has to decide quickly whether to 
expend resources on research or on building new units to help ﬁ ght a battle taking 
place in real time. Dungeon Keeper is a good example of this kind of game: In each 
level, the player’s creatures research a set of magic spells while still defending their 
dungeon against invaders. With temporary upgrades, the player loses the beneﬁ t of 
her research when she goes on to the next level; she has to research the technology 
over again. This seems a bit peculiar, but it works well if you don’t think of the lev-
els as part of a continuing story. It’s more credible if you present each level as an 
independent scenario, unrelated to the others—as Dungeon Keeper in fact does.
TECHNOLOGY TREES
If your game has a large number of upgrades, you should organize them into a 
branching tree structure, in which achieving one upgrade makes available a choice 
of several others that are logically related to the preceding one. See Figure 14.3 for 
an example. Achieving the steam engine, for instance, could give the player the 
opportunity to research the railroad, steamships, or powered factories. Strategy 
games usually characterize these advancements as technological research, so such a 
structure is called a tech tree even though some of the upgrades may not actually be 
technological. In role-playing games, a similar mechanism applies to upgrading a 
character’s individual skills; in that context it is called a skill tree, but the function 
is the same: It is a diagram of the available upgrade paths for a unit.
Once the player chooses to research an upgrade on a particular branch, you can 
force her to complete all the upgrades that are part of that branch before moving to 
another branch or prevent her from ever researching upgrades on another branch. 
So, for example, choosing to research agriculture might force the player to stick 
with agricultural advancements, and other upgrades such as ﬁ shing or animal hus-
bandry would be closed to her—either until the agricultural branch has been 
completed or perhaps forever. This restriction encourages asymmetric play; if one 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

438 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
player chooses agriculture and another chooses ﬁ shing, each is committed to the 
approach she has chosen. However, it will make your game tricky to balance and 
will discourage some players. Many players, particularly women, dislike being 
forced to make irrevocable decisions whose consequences they do not know.
To design a tech tree, ﬁ rst think of all the upgrades that you would like to intro-
duce in the course of the game. For each upgrade, note whether it applies to a 
particular unit, all units of a particular type, all units in the player’s forces, or to 
the core mechanics generally. Also note what event will trigger the upgrade—the 
passage of a certain amount of time, the expenditure of resources, or some other 
achievement such as defeating a particular enemy unit or arriving at a certain place 
on the map. Once you have an idea of what upgrades you want to include, you can 
organize them into a logical sequence or tree; a simple diagram will show which 
upgrades lead to which others.
As a general rule, upgrades should strengthen the player’s side and give the player 
new choices to make. Researching horse breeding, for example, might make cavalry 
units available for the ﬁ rst time and thus require the player to start thinking about 
how to use them. Don’t worry too much about correctly setting the exact cost and 
length of time required by each upgrade. Pick some numbers that feel right; you 
will undoubtedly modify them during testing.
FIGURE 14.3 
Part of the tech tree 
from Civilization III.
Prerequisites are at the 
left; upgrades progress 
to the right. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
439
 CHAPTER 14
DON’T DISALLOW UPGRADES ARBITRARILY
In order to increase the difﬁ culty of a particular level, some RTS games won’t allow the 
player to research certain upgrades or use certain units in that level even though the 
player knows that those upgrades or units are available in other levels. Players ﬁ nd this 
frustrating because it feels arbitrary. Consider the following alternative methods.
Instead of disallowing upgrades that are accessible in previous levels, change the costs 
of the units you want to restrict on a level-by-level basis. That is, if the advanced cyber-
marine requires a large quantity of a certain resource, then make that resource 
extremely scarce on a level in which you really don’t want the player using cybermarines. 
Or require that the player use those resources in some other way to achieve victory on 
that level. Be clear about this—state it in the mission objectives. Then, if the player 
wastes all his resources on building cybermarines instead of achieving the mission, he 
will have only himself to blame. Another possibility is to make the restricted units costly 
by making sure the enemy is extremely proﬁ cient in destroying that kind of unit. If, say, 
you want to disallow ﬂ ying units, arm the computer opponent with extremely effective 
antiaircraft weaponry.
Ensuring that the player knows it is not wise to deploy a certain kind of unit under cer-
tain circumstances makes for better gameplay than does simply preventing the player 
from deploying those units. The player then appreciates and accepts the restriction as a 
part of the game rather than resenting what seems to be an arbitrary decision by the 
game designer.
Logistics
Strategy decides where to act; logistics brings the troops to this point.
—GENERAL ANTOINE-HENRI JOMINI
Logistics is the management of supply: the production, distribution, maintenance, 
and replacement of personnel and materials. In real life, it’s an immensely compli-
cated business. War games, on the other hand, tend to have simpliﬁ ed logistics. 
This is because real armies have huge general staffs to look after such things; in a 
war game, the player has to handle it all himself. Because the player is also busy 
with strategy and tactics, you should simplify the logistics. The next few sections 
discuss different aspects of logistics and how to handle them.
SUPPLIES AND CONSUMABLE ITEMS
For the most part, computer war games ignore the soldiers’ human needs. Soldiers 
don’t eat and don’t sleep, so the game doesn’t track supplies such as food or sleep-
ing bags. Similarly, vehicles don’t require fuel or spare parts. Keeping track of these 
supplies is simply too much of a nuisance. The one major exception to this rule is 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

440 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
ammunition; some games track it and some don’t. In general, if ammunition is 
cheap, doesn’t do much damage, and is quickly expended (such as arrows or bul-
lets), you should give units an unlimited supply because it’s not fun for the player 
to have to look after it all the time. If ammunition is particularly destructive, such 
as nuclear weapons, then you should make it rare and expensive and keep track of 
how much is around. To summarize it simply, “Don’t sweat the small stuff.”
SUPPLY LINES
A supply line is the route over which fresh troops and war materiel must be trans-
ported from their source to where they are needed, usually the battleﬁ eld. Cutting 
the enemy’s supply line is a classic stratagem of war; it leaves the enemy troops 
without support and they often have to surrender when they run out of the things 
they need. Seizing bridges is a high priority in land warfare because a bridge is 
often a choke point through which troops and supplies must pass. Most computer 
war games model supply lines correctly for the troops themselves; ﬁ ghting units do
have to get from wherever they are produced (usually near their headquarters) to 
where the action is. Few games implement supply lines for items such as food and 
ammunition, however, for two reasons. First, supplying materiel is an additional 
task that players may not have the time (or inclination) to manage. Second, imple-
menting supply lines realistically means creating transport units and modeling the 
supplies as individual objects. All this makes for a more complicated game engine 
and requires additional CPU time to execute.
ABSTRACTING THE DISTRIBUTION PROCESS
To reduce these problems—yet still require the players to create the resources that 
units need—you can make the production process concrete, but abstract the distri-
bution process. For example, the troops in Warcraft eat food. The food is produced 
on farms (which may be destroyed by the enemy, thereby reducing production), 
but once the food is produced, it is magically available to all the player’s troops 
everywhere. The existence of the troops causes the food to disappear from storage, 
but the food doesn’t actually have to be transported to where the troops can eat it.
This decentralization of resources can permit unrealistic strategies if you do not 
handle it carefully. In Age of Empires, for instance, a player can send a lone peasant 
into a remote area to build a barracks, which has the function of creating troops. 
Assuming that it is not spotted by the enemy, the barracks immediately starts pro-
ducing troops right on the enemy doorstep with no regard for supply lines or 
resource distribution. Although this is an imaginative way to exploit the decentral-
ized-resources mechanic, it harms the players’ suspension of disbelief because it’s 
so unrealistic.
In his regular design column for U.K.-based Develop magazine, Dave Morris sug-
gested another alternative that rewards a player for maintaining supply lines 
without actually requiring her to personally manage the transportation of materiel 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
441
 CHAPTER 14
(Morris, 2001). Morris was the lead designer on Warrior Kings, and for that game
he proposed a special unit called the supply wagon. Supply wagons carried food, 
and so long as troops were near a loaded supply wagon, they regained health points 
(which consumed the food). When the food in the wagon ran out, the supply 
wagon automatically trundled back to the nearest friendly palace (palaces acted as 
storehouses) for more food. Units whose supply wagon couldn’t get back to a source 
of supplies couldn’t regain health. This rewards the player for keeping supply lines 
open but does not actually require her to do so. (Unfortunately this idea was not 
implemented in the ﬁ nal version of the game for lack of time.)
ROAD-BUILDING
Another way to abstract the distribution of supplies while still requiring the player 
to pay some attention to them is to let the player build roads. Consider the territory 
map in Figure 14.4.
Town B has access to a forest—it has a road (supply line) leading directly to the for-
est, providing a ready source of lumber. This allows Town B to build wood-based 
units, such as catapults. Town A is linked to Town B via a road. This road provides a 
readily available supply route between Town A and Town B. Hence, Town A has 
exactly the same production capabilities as Town B. Anything that is available to 
Town A is also available to Town B, and vice versa. Town C is a newly built town. 
FIGURE 14.4 
Resource distribution 
via a road network
A
B
C


--- PAGE BREAK ---

442 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
No roads have been built to Town C, so it does not have access to the resources of 
Towns A and B until a linking road is built.
This is the approach taken by Civilization III. Of course, it’s still not an entirely 
accurate solution—materials are assumed to travel instantaneously along the roads. 
(It’s interesting to note, though, that previous iterations of the Civilization series did
implement trade caravans, but Civilization III removed that feature to improve 
gameplay.)
INFLUENCE MAPS
Another option is to assume that any unit within a certain distance from a supply 
depot can receive supplies from that depot even if no unobstructed route actually 
exists. This is a variation of the decentralized distribution of Age of Empires. Every 
supply depot magically transmits supplies to units within its circle of inﬂ uence, but 
units that move beyond the range of any depot don’t get them. Designers often call 
this inﬂ uence of objects on the terrain around them an inﬂ uence map. They usually 
accomplish this by having the software track regions of inﬂ uence on a map that it 
maintains internally. Most games that use inﬂ uence maps include some means of 
displaying the areas of inﬂ uence, either continuously or at the player’s option.
Two out of the three races in StarCraft use an inﬂ uence map to indicate where their 
inﬂ uence has spread (although the core mechanics use these maps only to deter-
mine where structures may be constructed and not to provide supplies to mobile 
units). For example, the Protoss power beacons, which provide power to the Protoss 
factories, have a limited radius of power distribution. When the player wants to 
construct a new factory, the game displays the inﬂ uence map by color-shading the 
landscape, showing the areas where the factory may be built.
The Game World
The choice of setting for your strategy game is a vital consideration because
different players prefer different fantasies. Dress up the underlying gameplay in
a different setting and it can feel like a totally different game. You can transplant 
the core mechanics of a strategy game into many different settings; it’s practically
a universal game construction kit. Will your game be set in history? The contempo-
rary world? The future (as you anticipate it)? Or a fantasy world of your 
imagination?
In spite of the ease with which strategy game mechanics can be reused in a new 
setting, you will need to keep some important distinctions in mind.
Historical Settings
Military strategy games, perennial favorites, tend to be set in the past—either an 
accurately portrayed past or one in the realms of mythology. People who play 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
443
 CHAPTER 14
games about historical events tend to know a lot about the pertinent history,
and the more representational your game claims to be, the more closely they will 
scrutinize it to see if it rings true. You can get away with a certain amount of sim-
pliﬁ cation (as Age of Empires did) provided that you are honest about it.
The danger here is dipping too often from the same well. So many games are set 
during World War II that the market has become oversaturated. Customers don’t 
want to buy the same game again and again. However, there is always room for 
original approaches so long as you can make them compelling. You should at least 
think about moving into less common territory; consider the Korean War, the wars 
of Shaka Zulu, the Warring States era in Chinese history, and so on. Humanity’s 
long and bloody history offers plenty to borrow from.
Modern Settings
Choosing a present-day military conﬂ ict risks generating controversy and negative 
public opinion. Although this could gain your game some degree of notoriety, 
unless the game itself is a superlative addition to the gaming world, the disadvan-
tages of such exposure greatly outweigh any advantages. In 2009, game publisher 
Konami announced, then withdrew, a game called Six Days in Fallujah, based on 
the 2004 battle in that Iraqi city. American and British war veterans, as well as 
peace groups, objected strongly to the game despite the designer’s plans to be both 
accurate and respectful. (Six Days in Fallujah was actually a third-person shooter, 
not a strategy game, but it still illustrates the risk of making a game about a sensi-
tive subject.)
If you want to use modern settings and weaponry, you might ﬁ nd it less controver-
sial to make them ﬁ ctitious. Both America’s Army and Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare 
use ﬁ ctitious settings.
With a modern setting, you have to address the problem of battleﬁ eld scale. It takes 
foot infantry days to walk across a region that a jet ﬁ ghter can ﬂ y over in a few sec-
onds. You therefore have to choose which scale your game is really designed for 
and perhaps exclude units that don’t work well on that scale.
Future (Science Fiction) Settings
Science ﬁ ction (SF) settings remain popular and allow a lot of scope for invention, 
but unless you have a compelling world to present, you run the risk that your fan-
tasy will not capture the public’s imagination. It’s easier to base them on a success-
ful license (Star Wars, Star Trek, Alien, and so on) than to carve out a new universe 
for yourself. StarCraft managed it, but not everybody is so fortunate.
From a design standpoint, the danger with science ﬁ ction games is that it is easy to 
add fantastic components that magically solve problems—a consistent weakness of 
the Star Trek stories, in which the chief engineer is always reversing the phase 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

444 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
inducers or inducing the phase reversers to get our heroes out of a jam. If you really 
want to make a self-consistent SF universe, you’ll have to think hard about its tech-
nology. Alternatively, you can go for humor and make a game like Strange Adventures
in Inﬁ nite Space, a combination strategy/spaceship simulator full of goofy weapons 
and odd features that aren’t meant to be taken seriously.
Terminology also presents a problem in science ﬁ ction settings. Because the weap-
ons and units don’t really exist, the player doesn’t have any idea what they can do. 
No one can tell from the names alone whether a plasma riﬂ e is more or less power-
ful than a photon blaster. This is one of the very few weaknesses in Sid Meier’s Alpha 
Centauri: The player either spends a lot of time looking things up in reference 
books or learns by trial and error. When players encounter an unfamiliar weapon 
for the ﬁ rst time, it’s a good idea to indicate its power or value by some visual sign. 
In fact, this advice applies to just about any game world that you can’t be sure the 
player knows much about.
Future settings have the same scale problems as modern battleﬁ elds. StarCraft han-
dles this by simply stating that ﬂ ying vehicles are only about ﬁ ve times as fast as 
foot infantry; if the foot soldiers walk at 3 miles an hour, the jet ﬁ ghters ﬂ y at 15! It 
is grossly unrealistic, but it works. The aircraft are still the fastest vehicles in the 
game, so their role as hit-and-run units remains consistent even though they are 
slower than they realistically should be.
Fantasy Settings
The major distinction between science ﬁ ction worlds and fantasy worlds is that
the former characterize their imaginary weapons as technological while the latter 
characterize them as magical. Fantasy worlds, often set in a quasi-medieval envi-
ronment, also tend to place more emphasis on close-range and hand-to-hand 
combat (swords and arrows, not cruise missiles) and to eschew vehicles such as air-
planes and tanks. Fantasy combat should not resemble modern combat too closely; 
that’s not what the players want. The Warcraft series is by far the most successful 
group of strategy games set in a fantasy world, and well worth studying. But it 
would be nice to see a lot more games set in worlds other than northern European 
mythology. Skip the elves and trolls and look to the folk tales of India, Africa, the 
Americas, and Australasia for inspiration.
The Presentation Layer
Strategy games often have extremely complicated core mechanics. Consequently, 
the design of the presentation layer is critical, even more so if the game is in real 
time and the player is under time pressure. The interface must present complicated 
information in clear, well-organized ways so that the player can grasp it easily. If 
you don’t design the presentation well, the large amount of information available 
can make the game overwhelming, especially to inexperienced players.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
445
 CHAPTER 14
Interaction Model
For strategy games, the interaction model tends to be on a large scale. Rarely do you 
ﬁ nd a strategy game with a single avatar, although the PC version of Battlezone (not 
to be confused with the original coin-op) is a notable exception. Generally, the 
player indirectly controls the units under his command while enjoying a godlike 
view of the game world. The true interaction model, in this instance, is related to 
the scale of the world. How many units does the player control? Is it a small squad, 
or is it a large army?
The feel of a small squad is much more personal and intimate than a large army. 
The player can explore the personalities of the units more and tends to care more 
about the individual fates of his units. Also, with smaller groups, individual charac-
ters may improve their skills and abilities as the game goes along. The X-COM series 
of games is particularly strong in this area—the player controls several small squads 
of about 20 soldiers each, small enough so that the player can keep a handle on 
each individual member. Incidentally, in these games, the player can also build up 
a team of noncombat units by recruiting one at a time the scientists that research 
the alien technology.
For larger-scale games, it is too hard for the player to keep track of every single unit 
in the army, although some games do attempt this. Civilization III, for example, 
allows units to upgrade from Recruit to Veteran to Elite status, a simple progression 
that players can easily understand. Others, such as Warcraft III, designate a small 
number of units as Heroes. A Hero has special abilities and requires personal atten-
tion from the player. The player can easily focus his attention on the small number 
of Heroes while treating the ﬁ ghters in the other squads in the army as undifferen-
tiated groups.
Camera Model
For many years, computer strategy games displayed their game worlds in two 
dimensions as seen from above, effectively treating the video screen like a map or a 
tabletop game board. Later games adopted an isometric perspective in which build-
ings and units appeared to stand up above the surface of the landscape, although 
the underlying model of the world was still 2D. With the arrival of 3D display 
engines, strategy games began to include fully three-dimensional worlds with 3D 
modeled hills, valleys, and other landscape features, as well as 3D modeled units.
Regardless of the display technology, players of strategy games need to see the big 
picture, the overall view of the game world. The player cannot plan an effective 
strategy if she is forced to view the world from one avatar point of view. Unless 
you’re trying to model what warfare was like for a general of ancient times—back 
when generals fought alongside their troops—you should choose some form of aer-
ial perspective. The player will also ﬁ nd it valuable if you allow her some control 
over the camera so that she can zoom out to see the whole battleﬁ eld or zoom in 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

446 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
on a particular ﬁ ght and move the camera around to different points of view. See 
the Total War series for a good example. A few games implement intelligent cameras 
that automatically move to locations where particularly important events are tak-
ing place, but if you do this, be sure the player can turn it off. In a strategy game, 
especially a real-time one, the player needs control over what she’s seeing.
User Interface
The problem in designing the user interface of a strategy game is that the player 
must be able to control action at different scales— from that of the whole army to 
the individual ﬁ ghter. Presenting such different kinds of information seamlessly 
without breaking the ﬂ ow of the game can prove difﬁ cult.
Most strategy games present different kinds of data in separate windows in much 
the same manner as a windowed operating system. Most games do not offer all the 
window-management features of an operating system, however, nor do they use 
the operating system’s visual style. No designer wants her game to look like just 
another business or productivity application. Assuming that you take a windowed 
approach, try to ensure that, within reason, the windows behave as the player 
would expect. Make buttons clear, concise, and recognizable. If a button is not 
appropriate for a given unit—a movement command for a building, for instance—
leave it visible but dim it, or apply a gray to indicate that it can’t be used, or if 
possible remove the button from the window for units that can’t use it.
Remember to cater to both experienced and inexperienced players. Inexperienced 
players need clear and easy ways to ﬁ nd commands, whereas more advanced play-
ers need quick access. You may also consider providing separate levels of 
command—a beginner mode and an advanced mode—so that the player can issue 
more complex commands as he becomes more experienced. For the advanced play-
ers, provide keyboard shortcuts for every command in the game.
Ensure that your game presents the user with sets of commands grouped by func-
tion. SimCity 4, though not a strategy game, provides an excellent example of a 
well-planned user interface in this regard. A nested sequence of menus ensures that 
related commands are displayed together. At the top level, the player can choose 
between mayor mode and god mode. Mayor mode provides standard commands for 
building the city grouped by functions such as those pertaining to roads, to water, 
or to civic buildings. God mode provides an unrelated set of commands that allow 
the player to unleash all sorts of fantastical and supernatural events upon her 
unsuspecting sims.
Artiﬁ cial Opponents
Single-player strategy games often present the ﬁ ction that the player is opposed by 
another player like himself, who makes moves just the way the player does. In war 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
447
 CHAPTER 14
games, it’s fun to think of pitting one’s wits against an enemy general. The old 
Electronic Arts war game Patton vs. Rommel explicitly encourages this fantasy; the 
player takes the role of one general and the computer takes the other. However, it is
only a fantasy, of course; the opponent it provides is artiﬁ cial, implemented by AI 
techniques. This section includes a brief introduction to some of the AI used to cre-
ate artiﬁ cial opponents in strategy games. As the designer, you won’t have to write 
the software, but you should be aware of the strengths and weaknesses of several 
approaches.
Game Tree Search
In turn-based games such as checkers, chess, or Go, each player has a number of 
choices—possible moves that he can make—at each turn. You choose your move, 
then your opponent makes his move from the choices available to him, and then 
it’s back to you with a new set of possible moves, and so on. If you draw a graph of 
this, showing how the options branch out at every turn, it looks like a tree, so the 
set of all possible future moves is called the game tree.
With simple games, artiﬁ cial opponents search through the game tree, looking
for the moves that produce the most advantageous result. The fewer choices there 
are, the easier this is. With tic-tac-toe, the problem is trivial; with checkers, it is 
comparatively easy; with chess, it is quite difﬁ cult; and with Go, no one has yet 
managed to build a computer game that can play as well as a master human player. 
In Go, the board is large and the player can play nearly anywhere, so the number of 
possible future moves is simply astronomical. In addition, unlike in chess, it is very 
difﬁ cult to evaluate whether a potential move is good or bad; it depends too much 
on other moves.
As a designer, do not expect to use game-tree search in any but the simplest of 
games. The length of time it will take for the computer to compute a good move 
increases exponentially with the number of possible moves available.
Neural Nets
A neural net is a program that simulates, in a simpliﬁ ed form, the behavior of brain 
cells, or neurons. The details are too complex to discuss here, but put simply, a neu-
ral net mimics the brain’s ability to recognize and correctly identify patterns of 
data. This is how we learn to tell an apple from an orange, for example: Our brains 
learn the visual patterns that apples and oranges fall into. Like the brain, a neural 
network has to be taught to recognize the pattern; after that, and with repeated 
exposure, the brain or the neural network identiﬁ es the pattern correctly.
Some efforts have been made to teach neural nets to learn to play strategy games by 
recognizing patterns of play that lead to success. Although this technique is worthy 
of further research, you shouldn’t count on it. Neural nets take a long time to learn, 
and the process doesn’t work well for complex patterns of information, such as the 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

448 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
dozens of possible choices available to a player in a modern war game. Furthermore, 
because of the way neural networks store data, there is no way to tell what the data 
actually mean. You can’t teach the network a new pattern simply by tweaking the 
numbers stored inside it; you have to start over again from the beginning.
Hierarchical Finite State Machines
In the absence of orders, go ﬁ nd something and kill it.
—ERWIN ROMMEL
Hierarchical ﬁ nite state machines have proven to be the most successful mechanism 
for creating artiﬁ cially intelligent opponents in war games because they can handle 
large numbers of units and produce seemingly intelligent, coordinated behavior.
WHAT IS A FINITE STATE MACHINE?  
A ﬁ nite state machine (FSM) is a conceptual machine rather than a real piece of 
mechanical engineering. Its rules establish a simple behavioral system for an indi-
vidual automated character, such as a unit in a war game. The unit can inhabit a 
limited number of states (such as scouting, guarding, pursuing, and retreating), 
and it’s only ever in one state at a time. As long as the unit is in a given state, it per-
forms a particular activity. Certain events cause it to make a transition to a new state, 
after which it starts performing a new activity. Here’s an example from real life.
In 1960, researchers at Johns Hopkins University built a little robot called the 
Hopkins Beast. The only thing the robot did was wander around the computing 
laboratory. When its batteries got low, it would start to search for an electrical out-
let with its photocell eye. (Electrical outlets were the only object that it could 
recognize.) If it found an outlet, it would plug itself in until its batteries recharged. 
Then it would set off wandering again. So the Hopkins Beast possessed only three 
possible states: wandering, searching, and recharging. Its initial state was always 
wandering. The only thing that would cause a transition to searching was a low 
battery. When it detected that its battery was low, it would transition to the search-
ing state, turn on its eye, and continue to move through the halls. Once it detected 
an outlet, it would transition to the recharging state and plug itself in. Once it 
detected that it was charged up, the Beast would transition back to the wandering 
state. It would unplug itself and start wandering again.
The Hopkins Beast was extremely simple, but you get the idea. You can use FSMs to 
deﬁ ne the behavior of units. One state should be a default for that unit type—nor-
mally, holding its current position or patrolling (General Rommel’s advice notwith-
standing). For each state that you deﬁ ne, you must indicate how the unit behaves in 
that state and list all the things that will cause it to transition to a new state. FSMs 
have a weakness in that they can’t walk and chew gum at the same time—that is, 
they can only be in one state at a time, so a single individual can’t work on two 
things at once. However, the units in war games seldom need to do this anyway.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRATEGY GAMES 
449
 CHAPTER 14
For more information about designing FSMs, read the chapter “Fundamental AI 
Technologies” in Core Techniques and Algorithms in Game Programming by Daniel 
Sánchez-Crespo Dalmau (Dalmau, 2004). Although it is a book on programming 
the text is very accessible to non-programmers.
HIERARCHICAL FINITE STATE MACHINES IN GAMES
A hierarchical ﬁ nite state machine (hFSM) actually consists of several different 
FSMs, and the ones higher up in the hierarchy give orders to the ones lower 
down—that is, the controlling hFSMs send signals to those lower down in the hier-
archy, ordering them to change states. An artiﬁ cially intelligent opponent in such a 
system chooses a top-level goal, such as “take and hold this hill,” and delegates the 
tasks required to achieve the overall goal to subordinate FSMs that further delegate 
down to the individual unit level.
This is the way commands move down through a real army. The captain decides that 
he needs to take a hill and so delegates different activities to different platoons under 
him: providing covering ﬁ re, creating a diversion, and so on. If done properly, the 
platoons each have a different goal and won’t get in each others’ way. The sergeant 
in each platoon then commands his individual men to achieve the platoon’s goal 
in the same way that the captain commanded the sergeants. Each of the men then 
tries to achieve his own goal by executing the command he has been given. In a 
video game, each man has his own FSM that determines his behavior. The FSM reacts 
to changing conditions on the battleﬁ eld (for example, “The unit I was told to attack 
is dead, so I will look for another one to attack”) and also to orders received from 
the superior FSM, that is, the sergeant’s FSM that governs the platoon as a whole (for 
example, “Your mission is accomplished, so cease ﬁ re and guard your position”).
The nice thing about hFSMs is that they produce emergent behavior—that is, they 
may cause units to behave in ways that are not explicitly programmed into the 
rules. hFSMs also allow you to design the AI from the top down, creating large-
scale strategies that are made up of individual smaller-scale strategies. hFSMs are 
not restricted to combat, either: You can also use them to achieve economic goals, 
directing worker units to produce different resources as needed and telling them to 
stop when they’ve stockpiled enough.
DESIGN RULE Don’t Ask AI to Micromanage Troops
You may be tempted to try to create large-scale AI systems that coordinate the movements 
of individual units right from the top—a sort of micromanagement. Don’t do this; the 
result will be as unwieldy in your game as it would be in real life if a general tried to tell 
each individual soldier what to do. Create intelligent behaviors for each level of the hier-
archy, and intelligent results will emerge.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

