452 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
3. Will the game include challenges other than conﬂ ict, such as exploration or eco-
nomic management? How will they work with the conﬂ ict challenges?
4. Some games, such as Go, are about control of territory rather than destruction of 
units per se. If this is true of your game, how is territory seized and how is it 
retained (or retaken)? What methods are used to indicate to the player who owns a 
particular region?
5. If the game involves units in combat, what are the units and what are their key 
characteristics (health, speed, range, rate of ﬁ re, and so on.) and limitations?
6. Is the player given a ﬁ xed number of units at the beginning, as with most strat-
egy board games such as chess, or is there a production mechanism? If there is a 
production mechanism, what are the production times and costs of each unit, and 
what (if anything) is consumed by production? If something is consumed by pro-
duction, where does it come from in the ﬁ rst place?
7. Real-time strategy games are prone to certain dominant strategies such as the 
race for resources hidden in the landscape. These blunt approaches tend to over-
whelm more subtle strategic details. Can you devise a way to predict and avoid them?
8. Does the game include upgrades or a technology tree? If so, what are the 
upgrades and how are they obtained? What does it add to the player’s experience of 
the game?
9. Does the game include logistics (maintenance of supply lines)? What supplies 
must be provided, and what happens if supply lines are broken? Does the supply 
mechanism include any abstractions to simplify it?
10. What is the game’s setting, if any? If the units are unfamiliar to the player, what 
visual cues or other cues will you use to indicate the difference between, for exam-
ple, a dragoon, a cuirassier, and a grenadier?
11. Is the game a large-scale one with hundreds or thousands of units or a small-
scale one with tens of units? How will this affect the player’s perception of the 
units? What user interface features will the player need to manage them?
12. How much can the player see? Does the terrain have to be explored? Will the 
game include the fog of war?
13. If you can get a copy, take a look at the level editor supplied with Warcraft III.
Which of the level-building features (triggers, timed events, and so on) would you 
like to include in your game?
14. Strategy games require particularly powerful AI, especially if the game is sup-
posed to play in general circumstances and not just prebuilt and prebalanced levels. 
Given the rules of the game, what goals should the AI work toward, and how 
should they choose the actions to achieve those goals?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 CHAPTER 15
453
Role-Playing Games
Role-playing games allow players to interact with a game world in a wider variety of 
ways than most other genres do, and to play a richer role than many games allow. 
Most role-playing games also offer an experience impossible in the real world: a 
sense of growing from an ordinary person into a superhero with amazing powers. 
Other genres usually provide players with these powers immediately, but in a role-
playing game, the player earns them through successful play and gets to choose 
which particular abilities he wants to cultivate. This chapter ﬁ rst deﬁ nes the role-
playing genre and then describes the unique gameplay features, modes, and 
mechanics of this type of game. The chapter focuses on single-player role-playing 
games that use both avatar-based and party-based interaction models. (Chapter 21, 
“Online Games,” discusses online multiplayer games, including role-playing ones.)
In addition, we’ll look at the world, story, and settings common to role-playing 
games and delve into the attributes of the avatars and other characters involved in 
the game. We’ll also look at the various game modes and some special issues for 
designing the user interface of a role-playing game.
Unfortunately, there isn’t room for more than a general overview of role-playing 
games. They include more different types of gameplay than most other genres and 
have the second most complicated user interfaces. (Construction and management 
simulations have the dubious honor of the most complicated user interfaces.) For a 
more detailed discussion of the subject, read Neal and Jana Hallford’s Swords and 
Circuitry (Hallford and Hallford, 2001).
What Are Role-Playing Games?
Computerized role-playing games are an outgrowth of the original noncomputer-
ized, pencil-and-paper role-playing games, of which Dungeons & Dragons is by far 
the most famous example. (For simplicity’s sake, this book calls computerized role-
playing games CRPGs and the noncomputerized kind tabletop RPGs to distinguish 
them from each other.) The object of both kinds of games, computerized and oth-
erwise, is to experience a series of adventures in an imaginary world, through an 
avatar character or a small group of characters whose skills and powers grow as 
time goes on. A group of characters who go on these adventures together in an RPG 
is universally called a party.
CHAPTER 15


--- PAGE BREAK ---

454 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
In tabletop games, the adventures, usually characterized as quests to achieve some 
goal, are devised and staged by one player acting in a special role as the game master
or dungeon master (this book uses the term game master or GM). The tabletop games’ 
rules are complex by comparison to other noncomputerized games. Almost all the 
game activity takes place in the players’ imaginations; only a few props or visual 
materials depict the game world. Consequently, the players may propose to take 
almost any action that they can think of, and the GM must decide whether the 
action is permitted within the rules and determine its consequences. In general, 
tabletop RPGs are permissive rather than restrictive, and any reasonable action is 
allowed—with the deﬁ nition of reasonable being the privilege of the GM. The pro-
cess involves a certain amount of ad-hoc rule making.
In CRPGs, the computer implements the rules, performs the activities of the game 
master, and presents the game world on the screen. Because the computer can offer 
the players only a ﬁ xed set of actions to take and can’t invent new rules on the ﬂ y, 
CRPGs aren’t as ﬂ exible as the tabletop games. However, because the players do not 
have to implement the rules and the graphics are often stunningly beautiful, CRPGs 
are somewhat more accessible and attractive to the novice player than tabletop RPGs.
Multiplayer online RPGs also sometimes include human GMs who work within the 
conﬁ nes of the computer-controlled rules. The GM acts similarly to a GM for a 
board game, modifying situations and keeping the game fresh. Chapter 21 covers 
multiplayer online RPGs.
A key aspect of tabletop RPGs is, as the name suggests, role-playing—that is, impro-
visational drama in which each player plays the role of his avatar character and the 
GM plays the roles of any NPCs. Emotional relationships can arise and change 
among the characters as the players play their respective roles. A good role-playing 
experience depends on the imaginations and acting skills of the players. For the 
most part, however, CRPGs have only borrowed the general themes and core 
mechanics from the tabletop games and not the role-playing activity itself. Single-
player CRPGs don’t yet have the power to simulate NPCs with the acting skill of a 
human GM. Role-playing in single-player RPGs is therefore limited to holding con-
versations with NPCs by means of a dialog tree, a technique that Chapter 7, 
“Storytelling and Narrative,” discussed in detail.
In contrast, multiplayer online RPGs do allow real role-playing between characters 
because the players can type messages to each other on the computer’s keyboard 
and sometimes even talk to each other via a microphone and speakers.
The essential parts of a computer role-playing game, then, are the quest or story of 
the game and character growth. The quests usually require combat, and the rules of 
the game are designed to support it. The rules also deﬁ ne how character growth 
occurs. Creating a successful CRPG depends on providing a captivating story and a 
rewarding character growth path.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 
455
 CHAPTER 15
ROLE-PLAYING GAME A role-playing game is one in which the player controls one or more 
characters, typically designed by the player, and guides them through a series of quests 
managed by the computer. Victory consists of completing these quests. Character 
growth in power and abilities is a key feature of the genre. Typical challenges include 
tactical combat, logistics, economic growth, exploration, and puzzle solving. Physical 
coordination challenges are rare except in RPG-action hybrids.
CRPGs have elements in common with many other genres; it is the way in which 
they implement them, and the combinations in which they occur, that set them 
apart. Because CRPGs include so many types of challenges, it’s not unusual for peo-
ple to make hybrids.
War Games
CRPGs and war games both include combat and a set of rules for determining how 
it takes place. However, CRPGs differ from war games in that CRPGs are about a 
small group of heterogeneous characters (and sometimes only one), almost always 
implemented as living humanoids, rather than a large group of often identical 
units such as tanks or airplanes. Unlike CRPGs, war games seldom keep track of the 
growth of individual units, and role-playing games don’t normally have factories 
that can produce more units.
The Heroes of Might and Magic series crosses the CRPG and war game genres. The 
games include both individual heroes and troops who have to be managed in large 
battles.
Action Games
Action games frequently test the player’s physical skills; CRPGs never used to, but 
physical challenges are becoming more common in CRPGs. The Elder Scrolls games, 
Morrowind and Oblivion, are both action-CRPG hybrids. They feature a single avatar 
and a user interface much simpliﬁ ed from the traditional party-based model. 
CRPGs include a lot of non–action-related activities such as buying and selling, as 
well as conversations with other characters in which the player has a choice of dia-
log. These activities are rare in action games.
Adventure Games
Like adventure games, CRPGs often have rich storylines with highly detailed char-
acters. Both types of games also involve a lot of exploration. However, in modern 
adventure games the player’s avatar is a highly speciﬁ c character provided by the 
game, whereas most CRPGs allow the player to deﬁ ne his own avatar or party of 
characters. Adventure games also tend to concentrate on one character, not a party 
of them. Adventure games traditionally offer puzzles rather than combat chal-
lenges, and their characters are seldom deﬁ ned by numeric attributes as in CRPGs. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

456 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
If any character growth occurs in adventure games, it is of a personal or psycholog-
ical nature rather than in numerically measured abilities such as strength, speed, 
and dexterity. CRPGs have a complex internal economy, and much of the growth 
that takes place consists of increasing these numbers.
The Final Fantasy games could be considered hybrids of CRPG and adventure. 
Battles are turn-based, requiring no action skills, and they have some of the most 
vivid stories and most beloved characters of any games made.
Game Features
In order for the story to progress and the characters to develop, the characters have 
to have something to do; therefore, exploring and combat make up a big part of 
most CRPGs. In most such games, the stories and challenges are prescripted, so the 
player experiences the same things each time he plays. In a few cases, individual 
levels are randomized on each play, which makes the games more replayable—well-
known examples include the Diablo series and a rather extraordinary game called 
NetHack (see Figure 15.1).
FIGURE 15.1 
NetHack (Windows 
user interface shown) 
TIP The earliest 
versions of NetHack
were entirely text-
based, as were the 
wonderful adventure 
games from Infocom 
(which are still avail-
able). Graphics impress 
the player, but words 
stimulate his imagina-
tion. Never forget the 
power of words. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 
457
 CHAPTER 15
NetHack is very small, so it contains almost no story. However, the character devel-
opment, adventuring, exploration, and combat elements of the game are remarkable
for its size. NetHack can offer so much variety because it doesn’t have to display 
events with graphics; it simply describes them with text. Later designers success-
fully applied its basic game mechanic to other products. The original Diablo from 
Blizzard owed more than a little of its success to that design.
Themes
CRPGs generally allow the player to experience a pivotal role in solving some 
hugely important problem. The premise of most role-playing games can be summed
up in the statement: “Only YOU can save the world!”—or the tribe or city or what-
ever level of society is threatened. However, saving the world is a cliché, an 
adolescent power fantasy that has been terribly overused in this genre. Consider 
some alternative quests that could have a secondary consequence of saving the 
world but need not:
■ Find and punish the person responsible for a loved one’s murder.
■ Learn the secret behind your hidden parentage.
■ Rescue the kidnapped princess/prince.
■ Find and reassemble the long-lost pieces of the magic object.
■ Destroy the dangerous object.
■ Find the evidence that will exonerate you from a false accusation.
■ Transport the valuable object past the people trying to seize it.
■ Try to get home after having been abducted.
While these are all very familiar themes, at least they’re not speciﬁ cally about sav-
ing the world.
PLANESCAPE: TORMENT
I strongly encourage you to take a look at Planescape: Torment (if you can’t ﬁ nd a copy, at 
least read the reviews and commentary available online). The premise of this unusual 
game has nothing to do with the typical quest to solve some enormous problem; rather, it 
is to discover something about the avatar’s past—initially, just his name, which at the 
beginning of the story, the player does not know. The game is actually about the psycho-
logical growth of an individual rather than saving the world, but even so, there is plenty 
of combat, exploration, trading, and all the other traditional RPG challenges along the way.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

458 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Progression
RPGs almost always tell a story, characterized as a long quest in pursuit of some 
important goal. The quest is broken down into a number of episodes that progress 
in a linear sequence, each with its own subquest and major challenge at the end. 
These end-of-episode challenges (almost always combat with a powerful enemy) are 
analogous to the boss characters at the ends of levels in action games. The story 
maps onto exploration—a journey, in other words—and each episode takes the 
player to a new location. Unlike in linear games such as rail-shooters or side-
scrollers, it’s often possible to go back to a previously visited location, though there 
may no longer be anything worthwhile to do there. A few games take the party 
back to a previously visited location for a new episode; when they do this, it’s often 
markedly different in order to give the player new things to do. In Planescape: 
Torment, the town of Curst is destroyed while the party is away.
In order to progress from one episode to the next, the player’s party has to have 
enough strength to overcome whatever major challenge lies at the end of the cur-
rent episode. This won’t be possible right away (even if the player knows where the 
challenge is), so the activities during the chapter help the characters to grow strong 
enough.
Because the story of the game is intimately bound up with the game world itself, 
the section “The Game World and Story” later in this chapter addresses storytelling 
in CRPGs.
In addition to the quests that lie along the main storyline, there are also optional 
side quests that are unrelated to the main ones. These are not thrust upon the player 
but must be sought out. Visible or audible cues inform the player that one of the 
NPCs in the game has a problem that the party can help solve; if the party goes up 
and talks to her, the player learns of the side quest and can choose to accept or 
reject it. Normally there’s no penalty for refusing one apart from the missed oppor-
tunity to have another adventure and earn some more experience. Players can 
usually abandon a side quest without penalty as well.
Side quests seldom carry over from episode to episode. (If a quest does so, it’s usu-
ally related to the main story rather than being a side quest.) Figure 15.2 illustrates 
the general progression of a CRPG.
MAIN
STORY
MAIN
STORY
Location
Location
Location
Optional
Quest
Optional
Quest
FIGURE 15.2 
Typical CRPG 
progression


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 
459
 CHAPTER 15
Gameplay Modes
Because CRPGs try to duplicate (within limits) the ﬂ exibility of tabletop role-play-
ing games, they offer more kinds of activities than any other genre. Among these 
activities are exploration, tactical combat, stealth operations, conversation, buying 
and selling, and inventory management.
CRPGs typically use four major gameplay modes and a variable number of minor 
ones. The major modes are exploration and combat, conversation, trade, and
inventory management. The minor modes are character creation (only used at the 
beginning of the game), character upgrade screens, and skill tree management.
The next four sections describe the major modes brieﬂ y.
EXPLORATION AND COMBAT
In older computer games, exploration was often a gameplay mode separate from 
combat, and the two modes had different camera models. Modern games combine 
them into a single mode. Traditional party-based RPGs often use an isometric per-
spective so the player can see the whole party. Figure 15.3 is from Baldur’s Gate II: 
Throne of Bhaal, which illustrates this isometric perspective.
Notice the complexity of the user interface, with buttons along three sides of the 
screen as well as a scrolling text window at the bottom.
FIGURE 15.3 
Baldur’s Gate II: 
Throne of Bhaal with 
an isometric perspec-
tive showing several 
party members as well 
as a number of NPCs


--- PAGE BREAK ---

460 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
If the game has only one character, ﬁ rst- or third-person perspectives are common; 
see the section “Camera Model” later in this chapter.
The actions available in the exploration and combat mode include selecting one or 
more characters in the party, setting a formation in which they will move together, 
designating a location for them to walk or run to, designating NPCs for them to 
attack or to talk to, picking up objects, and exercising special skills such as casting 
magic spells or searching for traps. The buttons to the lower right in Figure 15.3 are 
for setting a formation.
CONVERSATION
Conversation modes often use the same perspective on the game world as the 
exploration and combat mode but replace the exploration- and combat-related user 
interface features with a dialog-display mechanism. Occasionally, they switch the 
perspective to a close-up view of the other character in the conversation or display 
the character in a pop-up window.
CRPGs almost always manage conversations via the dialog tree mechanism that 
Chapter 7 describes. The player selects an NPC in the game world to speak to. A 
window opens, presenting a list of things that the avatar can say to the NPC. The 
player chooses one, and depending on what her choice is, the NPC replies, some-
times in text but often with an audio recording as well. Sometimes a scrolling 
window records the content of the conversation so that the player can go back and 
see what was said for as long as the conversation continues, or it may be recorded 
in a log or journal the player can bring up later. Asking the right questions or say-
ing the right things elicits useful information from the NPC and sometimes gains 
experience points for the player as well.
Figure 15.4 shows the conversation mode in Arcanum: Of Steamworks and Magick 
Obscura. A portrait of the person being spoken to appears in a window at the bot-
tom, along with some information about how he is reacting to the situation. 
Immediately above the portrait, superimposed on the game world, are two lines of 
text. These are lines of dialog from which the player may choose. Above them, the 
NPC’s most recent speech appears adjacent to the character.
Conversations almost always take place between the avatar character and just one 
other person. Conversations with more than one person become complicated 
because the dialog window must indicate to whom each statement is addressed.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 
461
 CHAPTER 15
TRADE
Any buying or selling of items in the game takes place in a specialized trading 
mode. Most games in this genre have towns or settlements with friendly NPCs—
blacksmiths, healers, and so on—who run businesses that offer to buy or sell goods 
and services. The interface is similar to the conversation mode interface, with a 
view of the shop, sometimes an image of the person the avatar bargains with, and 
often a list or a set of images of all the available items. The player can choose to buy 
an item or sell an item he already owns to get more money and can often bargain 
with the shopkeeper. Items purchased go directly into the avatar’s inventory.
INVENTORY
The inventory mode lets the player manage the objects that a given character is car-
rying around. Because CRPGs tend to include large numbers of objects, players 
need a system for keeping track of them and trading them among characters.
It’s not realistic to simulate the actual packing of items into a backpack, and in any 
case, most games allow characters to carry more than would be credible if they 
were real people. Instead, a typical solution is to divide the character’s carrying 
capacity into an array of boxes. Each box can carry one type of item. Large items 
take up several adjacent boxes. If an item is small enough, a single box can store 
FIGURE 15.4 
Arcanum: Of 
Steamworks and 
Magick Obscura
conversation


--- PAGE BREAK ---

462 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
several of them, up to some maximum limit. Money, usually gold coins, will ﬁ t in a 
box with so many hundred coins per container. Figure 15.5 shows the inventory 
mode for Dungeon Siege II, which appears as a pop-up window over the main game 
world.
Item weight may be a secondary constraint. No matter how many boxes the player 
has free, his character can carry only so many lead weights around. The BioWare 
games assess a penalty on a character’s speed if he is carrying more than a certain 
weight, and above another threshold the character cannot move at all. Money is 
often exempt from the weight limit because having to store it whenever the player 
ﬁ nds a big treasure hoard is annoying.
The player usually spends a disproportionate amount of time micromanaging the 
contents of the inventory, so inventory management becomes disproportionately 
important. Often, this task breaks a cardinal rule of human-computer interaction: 
Don’t force the player to perform a menial task best handled by the computer. A 
simpler solution is to display a simple table of the items in the inventory, without 
requiring the player to organize them in space. A pair of indicators, one for the 
total weight of the inventory and one for the total volume, could tell the player 
how much room he has left and how much more weight he can carry.
FIGURE 15.5 
The inventory mode in 
Dungeon Siege II


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 
463
 CHAPTER 15
Core Mechanics
During play, most of the actions in an RPG consist of the player designating a char-
acter to attempt some particular activity. The player must then roll dice (in video 
games, the computer simulates this) to determine whether the attempt was success-
ful or not. The rules governing success and failure for a particular activity describe 
how to test the die roll against one or more of the character attributes. For example, 
consider the following situation: Johnny Rock, the warrior, wants to smash down a 
Consider the situation in Figure 15.6. The player has found a staff but cannot put it in 
his inventory because he doesn’t have enough free boxes in the right conﬁ guration. The 
staff takes up 4 boxes in a 1 × 4 conﬁ guration, and the longest space he has available is 1 
× 3. If he moves the apple in the top space, however, he will have a space of 1 × 4 and will
be able to store the staff. The question to ask should be: Is this activity fun for the player?
Probably not; therefore, the computer should handle it automatically. Note that an adequate
4 × 1 horizontal space is available. Why can’t the staff simply rotate 90 degrees and ﬁ t into
the 4 × 1 gap at the bottom? Most CRPGs cannot handle that simple situation. What will 
happen if the player ﬁ nds a staff that requires a 1 × 5 space, when the storage space avai-
able consists of a 4 × 4 grid of boxes? In the real world, we could place it diagonally in the
pack, but CRPG inventory-maintenance systems generally cannot accommodate that action.
To resolve this, consider two possibilities. First, allow the player to turn rectangular 
objects sideways when putting them in the inventory, perhaps with a single button click 
that toggles the object between vertical and horizontal orientations. The staff in Figure 15.6
would easily ﬁ t along the bottom row if the player could turn it sideways. Second, and more
difﬁ cult to implement, design a system that automatically moves the inventory contents 
around to keep all the free space together—rather like defragmentin a hard disk drive.
THE RECTANGULAR INVENTORY PROBLEM
FIGURE 15.6 
An inventory problem


--- PAGE BREAK ---

464 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
door. He has a strength of 17, and rules state that he must roll three six-sided dice 
and add their values. If he rolls higher than his strength, he fails to break the door. 
If he rolls lower than or equal to his strength, then the door splinters to pieces.
This play mechanic forms the basis of all the combat and most other activities in 
the game as well. As the character’s attributes go up, the probability that a charac-
ter will be successful at a given activity improves. Because character growth is a key 
element of all RPGs, their core mechanics are designed around the character 
attributes.
Rolling Dice
Adding dice together is a pretty good way of generating random numbers in role-
playing games. It means that most of the time a player will get a middling die roll, 
and only rarely will she get an extremely good die roll or an extremely bad one. 
However, as a designer you must understand the probability distributions of the 
possible die rolls when you’re assigning difﬁ culty levels to tasks in the game 
because those chances are not evenly distributed. As Chapter 10 explained, the 
chance of rolling an 18 with three six-sided dice is less than one-half of 1 percent. 
If you specify that a task requires a die roll of 18, it will almost never happen. On 
the other hand, if you specify that it requires a die roll of less than 18, it will almost 
certainly happen—over 99.5 percent of the time. Know your probabilities!
Character Attributes
There isn’t space in this book to give any more than a general introduction to 
implementing characters in CRPGs. If you haven’t played any kind of role-playing 
game before, take a look at the Dungeons & Dragons Player’s Handbook (Wizards RPG 
Team, 2008) for an introduction to how one particular game system describes and 
designs characters. Although character attributes vary from game to game, many 
games borrow from, and sometimes expand upon, those in Dungeons & Dragons
because they are the oldest and most players are familiar with them.
Remember that in Chapter 5, “Creative and Expressive Play,” the section “Self-
Deﬁ ning Play” divides attributes into functional attributes and cosmetic attributes
and further subdivided the functional attributes into characterization attributes and 
status attributes. We’ll look into these next.
CHARACTERIZATION ATTRIBUTES
Characterization attributes determine the general abilities and qualities of a charac-
ter and change only infrequently; status attributes describe the current state of a 
character and may change often. Choose attributes for your game based on the 
actions that you want characters to be able to take. The attributes will determine 
whether the character can in fact perform those actions and if so, how well, how 
quickly, how powerfully, and with what probability of success. For instance, in the 
TIP If you haven’t 
already done so, 
please read the 
ection “Random
Numbers and the 
Gaussian Curve” in 
Chapter 10, “Core 
Mechanics.” 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 
465
 CHAPTER 15
Dungeons & Dragons system, the dexterity attribute determines how likely it is that
 a character will be able to pick someone’s pocket without detection.
Here is a brief overview of some particular types of characterization attributes that 
you may wish to consider:
■ Race is an unfortunate misnomer, as most games (rightly) do not distinguish 
among the conventional human racial classiﬁ cations (Caucasian, Native American, 
South Asian, and so on) except as a cosmetic attribute. In RPGs, race refers to 
groups of real and fantasy humanoids such as humans, dwarves, elves, giants, and 
so on. A better term would be species, but race is the term established by conven-
tion. Attributes connected with race usually govern the general body type and 
appearance of a character; they may also imply limits on the upper bounds of his 
strength or other physical attributes. Some games limit particular races’ ability to 
perform certain types of activities.
■ Sex naturally determines a character’s body type and may determine with 
whom the character may form romantic relationships, if the game includes them. 
(Many games assume that all their characters are heterosexual; The Sims is an 
unusual departure in this regard.) Otherwise, sex is almost always a cosmetic attri-
bute rather than a functional one.
DESIGN RULE No Sex Discrimination!
Do not place restrictions on a character’s abilities on the basis of his or her sex, such as 
limiting the strength of female characters simply because such limits are commonly 
accepted ideas in the real world. If a player wants to play a six-foot-six woman with the 
strength of Arnold Schwarzenegger, she should be allowed to. See the sidebar “Should 
Sex Be a Functional Attribute or a Cosmetic Attribute?” in Chapter 5 for more discussion.
■ Character class is a form of specialization that permits the character to perform 
certain actions (for instance, the Spellcaster class may perform magic spells), gain 
particular skills, and improve certain attributes while limiting the growth of oth-
ers. The object is to encourage, or even require, the player to create specialized 
rather than generalized characters. This in turn compels the player to set up a bal-
anced party containing a mixture of character classes, which is an additional 
challenge. Effectively, a character’s class determines his role in the party. Typical 
classes include ﬁ ghters, spellcasters, thieves (with special stealth abilities), and cler-
ics (with special healing abilities). You can undoubtedly think of others.
While character class is a traditional feature of tabletop RPGs, it is not essential, and it 
sometimes produces absurdities, such as a wizard whose class restrictions prevent 
him from using a kitchen knife. Not all games use character classes. If you want to 
implement classes, it would be better to deﬁ ne them in terms of limits on a character’s 
ability to improve certain skills rather than absolute prohibitions on certain activities.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

466 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ Physical attributes such as height, weight, strength, dexterity, endurance, max-
imum speed, maximum health, and so on determine how a character performs while 
moving, carrying weight, and during combat. Armor class is a commonly used physical 
attribute that contributes to the formula that determines whether a character will be 
hit by an enemy attack; it is roughly equivalent to defensive dodging in war games.
■ Mental attributes such as intelligence and sanity affect the character’s ability to 
learn or reason and to withstand disturbing or horrifying situations. Because a 
player may be more (or less) intelligent than his character is, it’s difﬁ cult to enforce 
intelligence except by ﬁ at. Some game systems use intelligence levels to place limits 
on the ability to cast certain kinds of magic spells.
■ Moral attributes determine the character’s attitudes toward justice and exploit-
ing others; in simple terms, the extent to which he is good or evil. It might be 
worthwhile to design a more subtle system of morality, however. Some people who 
think nothing of stealing wouldn’t dream of abusing an animal—and vice versa.
■ Social attributes determine a character’s social attitudes and ability to get along 
with others. Examples might be charismatic, nurturing, or leadership abilities. You 
might also use social attributes to describe such things as a character’s degree of 
xenophobia or his conversational skill. When a character engages in conversations, 
you can design the dialog engine so that it does not give an inarticulate character 
as many things to say as a more articulate character.
Some games—for example, in the case of the Fallout series—allow the player to 
establish the values of a primary set of characterization attributes, then calculate 
the values of a second set based on those in the primary set. In Fallout 3 (and its 
predecessors), the primary set of attributes includes strength, perception, endur-
ance, charisma, agility, intelligence, and luck. The secondary set of attributes 
includes hit points (that is, maximum possible health, calculated from strength 
and endurance), armor class (based on agility), and so on. The Fallout series has 
particularly well-designed core mechanics.
STATUS ATTRIBUTES, EXPERIENCE, AND CHARACTER LEVELS
In CRPGs, a character’s status attributes typically identify the character’s location, 
health, state of needs (like a need for food or rest), relationships with other charac-
ters, inventory of items owned or carried, and any other value that may change 
from moment to moment.
Among the most commonly implemented status attributes are two related ones 
that effectively measure the character’s growth: experience points, often abbreviated 
XP, and character level. Experience points are earned by successfully defeating ene-
mies in combat and by other activities that the designer feels represent important 
achievements in the context of the game’s story. Usually these consist of complet-
ing quests or conducting successful negotiations with NPCs via dialog. In a tabletop 
RPG, XP are awarded by the game master; in a CRPG, they are awarded by the com-
puter when it detects a particular event.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 
467
 CHAPTER 15
DESIGN RULE Don’t Penalize Low Health
Do not reduce the ﬁ ghting ability of a character because she has low health. This is gen-
erally a bad idea in strategy games; for RPGs, it is a design rule, because the number of 
characters that the player controls is smaller and the consequences are more damaging. 
If you penalize wounded characters, whoever gets in the ﬁ rst solid blow in a ﬁ ght has a 
big advantage. See the section “Health, Morale, and Fighting Efﬁ ciency” in Chapter 14, 
“Strategy Games,” for further discussion.
Typically, XP have no intrinsic value and cannot be traded for anything else; they 
are simply a measure of progress, almost like a score. However, when a character 
achieves a certain level of XP, the character’s level goes up a notch. The thresholds 
are sometimes determined by the character’s class. Achieving a new character level 
(called leveling up) usually gives the player an opportunity to raise one or more of 
his characterization attributes. In many games, the player earns a certain number 
of points, often two or three, that he can add to whichever characterization attri-
butes he is most interested in improving.
If you implement character classes with different thresholds for leveling up, you 
should make this clear to the player before he has to commit himself to a given class.
COSMETIC ATTRIBUTES
Because part of the appeal of role-playing is the ability to play as a character of 
one’s own design, CRPGs often have a great many cosmetic attributes. They add 
variety but don’t inﬂ uence the gameplay. Cosmetic attributes include such things 
as hair, skin, and eye color; facial features and body shapes within a particular race; 
clothing and jewelry that doesn’t function as armor or have magic powers; tattoos, 
piercings, and other body modiﬁ cations; and talismans, pets, or other distinctive 
objects that a person might keep nearby, such as Indiana Jones’s hat. In online role-
playing games, rare examples of such objects are highly sought after and command 
high prices within the game economy, even if they serve no function in the game’s 
combat challenges. Cosmetic attributes add richness to the play experience; the 
more of them that you can afford, the better—although they are not a substitute 
for good gameplay.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

468 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
WHY DO WE HAVE CHARACTER LEVELS?
The notion of character levels is so ingrained in the culture of role-playing that most 
players take it for granted. However, there’s no intrinsic mathematical reason why we, as 
game designers, should implement character levels. We already have experience points 
as a measure of character growth; why have levels as well? 
Levels are convenient in tabletop RPGs because they reduce the amount of bookkeeping 
required by the player and the GM: A character’s characterization attributes change only 
when the character levels up, except in rare circumstances. However, now that we have 
computers to simplify the bookkeeping for us, that in itself is not a sufﬁ cient reason to 
use character levels. It’s perfectly possible for the computer to gradually give the player 
additional powers on a continuing basis every time he earns some more experience. 
By using a system based on fractional values rather than integers, characters can experi-
ence steady continuous growth rather than big “stairstep” jumps in power.
The big jumps resulting from leveling up also harm the player’s immersion; they’re artiﬁ cial 
and don’t correctly model the increases in strength that a real person would experience 
in a training regimen, for example. It would be interesting to see a level-less role-playing 
game in which the player became aware of his gradually increasing strength without 
knowing what the actual numbers were. Such a game might appeal to an audience who 
prefers an immersive storylike experience over knowing their character’s precise numeric 
state; a hybrid of adventure game and RPG, perhaps.
However, there are good entertainment reasons for including character levels in an RPG. 
First, the levels give players a quick method of comparing the relative strengths of differ-
ent characters, especially enemies. This is unrealistic but useful when the player is trying 
to decide whether to include a particular character in the adventuring part or whether to 
attack an enemy character. Because most games don’t display a character’s strength 
visually, the player needs some other way of judging it, and the level provides that. 
Second, character levels provide players with a goal to work toward and a sense of 
achievement when it has been attained. Being granted points that they may add to their 
attributes feels like they are being given a reward, too. Finally, the leveling-up process 
lets the players decide where they want to distribute their new points, allowing them to 
upgrade their character as they see ﬁ t. If the system was continuously increasing their 
attributes, they wouldn’t have as much control, nor would they notice the difference 
so much.
In short, character levels reduce the realism of a game but offer a number of useful 
compensations.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 
469
 CHAPTER 15
Magic and Its Equivalents
Magic is such a distinctive aspect of role-playing games that we’ll look at it in a sep-
arate section. Note that for magic you can substitute psychic powers, spiritual power,
mental energy, or any other concept that allows characters to inﬂ uence the world, 
themselves, or other characters, by means not available to us in real life. Science ﬁ c-
tion games often posit advanced technology that is, as Arthur C. Clarke observed, 
indistinguishable from magic.
The use of magic is commonly restricted to a particular class of characters, often 
called mages, magic-users, or spellcasters. The purpose of this arrangement is to estab-
lish complementary classes of characters, one that is good at conventional physical 
combat and one that is good at magical combat, which encourages the players to 
create mixed parties containing members of both classes.
In tabletop RPGs, where it’s up to the GM to decide what is and isn’t possible, play-
ers can imagine all kinds of interesting things to do with magic. CRPGs are 
unfortunately limited by the fact that the software has to know how to implement 
any spell—and of course players expect a visible manifestation of the spell as well, 
which means creating animation and sound to go with it. Magic is most often used 
as a weapon or a shield and as a means of temporarily improving the values of the 
party characters’ attributes and harming the attributes of enemies.
Because magic doesn’t exist in the real world, you can’t assume that your player 
will know how it works in your game world. If you include magic in your game, you 
must deﬁ ne what kinds of things magic does and how to invoke it. You must also 
create a way to limit the amount of magic available, just as characters must have 
limited strength and health. Typically, when a spellcaster uses magic, he does so in 
a particular instance called casting a spell, the effects of which are usually immedi-
ate. (Few spells in games take time to begin working.) Some spells are over and 
done with right away, more or less corresponding to a shot in a strategy game; oth-
ers may have a lasting effect that ends after a certain amount of time. The effects of 
magic spells are almost never permanent in games. Permanent changes are too sig-
niﬁ cant to happen frequently, so any permanent change is normally made by the 
leveling-up process.
Dungeons & Dragons uses a rather awkward system for placing limits on magic, 
requiring a character to “memorize” spells which, once cast, disappear from the 
character’s “memory” in the same way that a gun consumes ammunition. The 
character must have time to rest and rememorize the spells before she can use them 
again. This was convenient in tabletop games where the players had to keep track 
of their spells by hand. Now that computers can do the bookkeeping, however, 
most designers prefer another system in which each spell consumes a certain 
amount of magical power, or mana, when it is cast. A character’s deﬁ nition includes 
a status attribute for the amount of mana the character has at the moment and a 
characterization attribute for the maximum amount that she may have. Drinking 
magic potions or simply waiting for time to pass may restore the mana. This system 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

470 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
permits the character to cast any combination of spells that she knows, as often as 
she likes, until her mana is gone.
Skills and Special Capabilities
In addition to the basic human-like characteristics—strength, intelligence, beauty, 
and so on—most RPGs let characters use and improve special skills and capabilities. 
CRPGs allow the player’s character to learn new skills over time, a rarity in other 
genres. The best-designed games allow the player to attempt to learn as many skills 
as she wants, restricted only by the time available, though her character’s aptitude 
in that skill will be based on previously assigned characterization attributes. You 
may want to allow characters to specialize, especially if the character practices a set 
of interrelated skills, while unpracticed skills gradually decline. For example, learn-
ing one skill, basic carpentry, could provide a solid basis for developing another, 
such as constructing buildings, whereas learning basic gardening would not.
OBTAINING NEW SKILLS
Skills are somewhat analogous to the unit upgrades of strategy games; like unit 
upgrades, they allow a character to do something that he could not do before or
to do it more effectively. The unit upgrade process in a strategy game is typically 
called research, whereas in a CRPG, acquisition of a skill is called learning. 
Sometimes a new skill (or the right to choose a new skill) is simply granted as
a reward for having achieved a certain amount of experience. However, you can 
also require the player to seek out a mentor NPC who will teach the new skill to the 
character in exchange for money—similar to the cost of research in strategy games.
The analogy between skills in CRPGs and unit upgrades in strategy games is not 
exact, however, for the following reasons:
■ In CRPGs, a skill earned by a character is permanent and stays with that charac-
ter as long as he lives (and usually survives reincarnation as well). In strategy 
games, a unit upgrade ordinarily lasts only for the duration of the current mission 
or level.
■ In a strategy game, an upgrade normally applies to all units of a given type, or 
sometimes to the player’s entire army and economic system. In a CRPG, a new skill 
applies to exactly one character, the one who learned the skill. It’s the difference 
between an industrial and a personal advance. CRPG skills are individual, like the 
ability to play music, rather than industrial, like an improved engine. Each charac-
ter has to have his own record of skills learned to date.
■ CRPG skill upgrades usually happen instantly, whereas research in a strategy 
game normally takes time. Although instant learning is completely unrealistic for 
something like archery or playing music, nobody wants to sit and watch while her 
character practices. Strategy game research doesn’t have this problem because 
research happens parallel to other activities.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 
471
 CHAPTER 15
USING SKILL TREES
Skills are usually organized into a skill tree, a growth path analogous to the tech tree
that Chapter 14 discussed. As with tech trees, learning a particular skill in the tree 
makes subsequent, more advanced skills available. Other than that and the differ-
ences in the previous section, they’re really quite similar. Take a look at the 
discussion of tech trees in Chapter 14 for some other ideas on things you can do 
with skill trees.
Figure 15.7 illustrates the idea of skill trees as implemented in Diablo II. The right 
side of the screen shows a skill tree, one of three different trees for a single charac-
ter, an Amazon. The tree currently shown is labeled “Passive and Magic Skills.” 
(The other two available for this character are “Javelin and Spear Skills” and “Bow 
and Crossbow Skills.”) Each icon represents a skill that may be learned, with the 
ones that are required ﬁ rst at the top (this tree is upside down). The arrows leading 
from icon to icon show the progression. An unlearned skill appears in dark grey, 
such as the horned helmet at the lower left of the tree. Skills that have been learned 
are shown in white.
Players earn skill points in Diablo II through experience, and may learn a new skill 
or improve an existing one by assigning the skill points to one of the skills in the 
tree. The “Skill Choices Remaining” box at the upper right indicates that the player 
has two skill points available to assign to one of the skills. The small boxes next to 
FIGURE 15.7 
One of the skill trees 
for the Amazon 
character in Diablo II
(right side)


--- PAGE BREAK ---

472 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
each icon hold the number of skill points for that skill so far; each additional point 
strengthens the effect of the skill during play.
Character Design
The design of tabletop RPGs allows the player to create her own avatar character 
before the game begins. Most CRPGs follow this model, particularly multiplayer 
online RPGs. Single-player CRPGs sometimes allow the player to create not only an 
avatar character but all the members of the party. Others let the player create only 
the avatar, then add further, predeﬁ ned characters to the party as the player 
encounters them in the game world.
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
OF PREDEFINED AVATARS
A small number of single-player games come with predeﬁ ned avatar characters that the 
player may initially customize in only a limited number of ways. This system constrains 
the player to use the given characters, which players who want complete freedom may 
not like. However, it has the great advantage that it enables you to tell a story in which 
the avatar already has a past and relationships with other characters when the game 
begins. Because you already know something about the avatar, you can build those 
details into the quests that the player will face. If you know nothing about the avatar 
(because he doesn’t exist until the player creates him), you must make all the quests
and other interactions in the game generic so they work for any kind of avatar. See the 
section “Speciﬁ c and Nonspeciﬁ c Avatars” in Chapter 6, and the sidebar “Character-Agnostic
Plots and King of Dragon Pass” in Chapter 7, for further discussion.
Typically, players set their cosmetic attributes any way they like: name, gender, hair 
color, clothing, and so on. They can also choose their character’s race, class, and 
moral attributes if the game implements such features. For other characterization 
attributes, the usual mechanism is to allow the players to roll simulated dice to gen-
erate a number of points and then allow them to distribute the points among their 
attributes however they see ﬁ t. This lets them concentrate their points in whichever 
attribute they’re most interested in developing. Players are sometimes allowed to 
ask for a new die roll if the ﬁ rst one is too low.
The Game World and Story
Once you know what the player is going to do, you need to think about where he’s 
going to do it. You should design the setting before the story. This advice is the 
opposite of that normally given to writers; the setting of a role-playing game is 
essentially a vast playground to adventure in. Decide what kind of environment
is suitable for the sorts of activities you have in mind.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 
473
 CHAPTER 15
Settings
CRPG game worlds tend to be set in fantasy and science ﬁ ction universes because 
both offer players opportunities to do things that they can’t do in real life: use 
magic in the former case and use advanced technology in the latter. They also 
make possible a huge variety of enemies, aliens, and monsters that don’t exist in 
the real world. Finally, such settings make the unrealistic rate of growth that game 
characters experience more plausible. If you were to set a role-playing game in the 
present day with ordinary humans as characters, it would be difﬁ cult to believe 
that within a few weeks of game time they could become dozens of times stronger 
or more resistant to injury than they were at the beginning. Even if you’re the 
strongest man on Earth, you can still be killed by a single bullet and everyone 
knows it. Fantasy and science ﬁ ction settings help players suspend their disbelief 
about these things.
This is not to say that you must choose only a science ﬁ ction or fantasy setting for 
your CRPG. You could, for example, create a role-playing game about a police ofﬁ -
cer or a spy whose character grows by acquiring new skills such as forensic 
examination or using bugging devices rather than weapons and magic. In such a 
game, you could easily set your story in the present day or the near future.
No matter what setting you choose, however, you must spend a lot of time and 
effort making it appealing to explore. This is more true of CRPGs than any other 
genre except adventure games and action-adventure hybrids. In an action game, 
the player is often moving too fast to appreciate the landscape much; and in a strat-
egy game, he’s often too busy commanding his armies and building his defenses. A 
CRPG is a slower-paced game, so players have time to look around. Novel and dra-
matic scenery is an important part of how these games entertain.
A recent trend with CRPGs, evidenced by Neverwinter Nights, Elder Scrolls III: 
Morrowind, and Arcanum: Of Steamworks and Magick Obscura, is that an editor within 
the game lets more involved players create their own scripted adventures in the 
game world.
This is a trend to be encouraged because it extends the sales life of the game, which 
in turn increases sales. Neverwinter Nights takes this to the extreme, allowing play-
ers to edit an adventure in real-time as other players journey through it.
Chapter 4, “Game Worlds,” discusses the creative work you need to do to design 
your setting.
Story
Once you have a setting, you need to decide what will happen there—the story of 
the game. A CRPG story is seldom simply a straightforward quest in the style of 
Lord of the Rings; it’s also a mystery. It’s a problem to be solved but also a riddle to 
be unraveled. The objective bring back the really valuable treasure is not sufﬁ cient to 
sustain player interest for long.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

474 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
The story of a CRPG is far longer than a movie or short story; it’s more like a novel, 
and a pretty big novel at that. Consequently, much of the advice about length and 
pacing of screenplays and stories for beginning writers doesn’t apply to CRPGs. 
Furthermore, the player has the option to take (or to ignore!) numerous side quests, 
something that never happens in a movie.
Begin by deciding on the game’s overall quest—that is, its ending. The player need 
not know exactly what this quest is until late in the game; usually the quest that he 
believes he’s pursuing at the beginning is not the real quest. (To use an example 
from literature, The Maltese Falcon begins with Brigid O’Shaughnessy walking into 
detective Sam Spade’s ofﬁ ce and asking him for help in ﬁ nding her sister. Later he 
discovers that there is no sister and she really wants him to help her ﬁ nd the Maltese 
Falcon.) You may want to have more than one possible ending to the overall quest 
(success, failure, or varying outcomes in between), but they should all be related.
Once you know the overall quest, then you have to decide how to get the player 
from wherever he starts to the end. Stories in CRPGs are typically presented as a 
journey through a landscape, with each episode of the story taking place in a dif-
ferent region. Work out the details of this journey, episode by episode, and all the 
new things and people that the player will discover along the way. There should be 
a number of twists and turns in the story—complicating factors that give the player 
more things to think about and to do. Common plot elements include long-lost rel-
atives appearing unexpectedly; enemies who turn out to be friends, and vice versa; 
clues that lead to dead ends (or to unexpected changes); lost treasures coming to 
light in unexpected places; hidden heirs to a kingdom; and so on. Most of these will
seem like clichés if you do not carefully handle them, so if you use them, look for 
ways to make them fresh and new. Or create situations that are the opposite of what
someone would ordinarily expect—the heir to a kingdom seeking not to obtain his 
crown but running away to avoid the onerous duties of monarchy, for example.
Once you have an overall story, complete with locations, adventures, and plot 
twists, then you can start adding side quests to give the player more experience. 
These should be shorter adventures that the player can accept, reject, or abandon 
without affecting the main storyline. However, they should still feel as if they’re in 
keeping with the player’s overall goals. One of the weaknesses of many CRPGs is 
that they start the player off on some vast life-or-death quest, then perpetually 
offer him opportunities to abandon it and just be a mercenary, treasure-hunter,
or errand boy. Try to make your side quests feel as if they are helping the player 
achieve his overall goals, even if only indirectly. For instance, suppose the player 
needs a speciﬁ c valuable object in order to get past the challenge at the end of an 
episode and the only way to get it is to buy it. If he then accepts a number of side 
quests to earn the money, the side quests are helping him to pursue his main goal 
even though their own content is unrelated.
You will probably need to do some noninteractive exposition to set the stage—
either an opening movie, voiceover narrative, or scrolling text story. If the avatar 
character is partially predeﬁ ned, you can include some of her history in the 
TIP Don’t think of 
side quests as mere 
ﬁ ller material around 
your main story. Side 
quests should be 
just as enjoyable as 
the main story, and 
you should not force 
the player down any 
particular path. Re-
member that your goal 
is to give the player 
interesting things to do 
while playing his role 
in the game world. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 
475
 CHAPTER 15
opening exposition; if the avatar is deﬁ ned entirely by the player, then the opening 
exposition cannot make reference to the avatar except in very general terms. You 
may want to have the opening exposition concentrate on the game world or the 
reason for the major quest in the game instead of the avatar.
You’ll need to write the opening carefully to be mysterious yet enticing. The bal-
ance between what you reveal and what you withhold has to be just right in order 
to induce the player to probe further. If you’re too mysterious, the player will have 
no reason to investigate the game world because he won’t know what he’s supposed 
to be doing, or why. If you tell too much, however, the player will be irritated 
because he wants to get started playing.
OPENING STORIES
Let’s look at two examples of opening stories in CRPGs and mine them for the balance of 
what is told and what is withheld.
Planescape: Torment
You awaken, frigid and confused, and realize you’re lying on a stone table. Scanning the 
room, you see only stone tables like yours and a sign that reads “The Mortuary.” You 
aren’t dead, so why are you here and, more important, who are you? Your thoughts are 
interrupted by the approach of a ﬂ oating skull that starts talking! It informs you that you 
just died again. What does it mean, again?
This opening is a particularly good example of minimizing exposition and maximizing 
mystery. Planescape: Torment is unusual in that the opening of the game presents only a 
mystery and not a quest. From the opening, the player can surmise that his avatar once 
had a normal life and that something strange has happened to cause him to become a 
cursed immortal. This is an interesting theme because of the inherent human fascination 
with mortality. Planescape poses the question: Who wouldn’t want to be an immortal, no 
matter what the price? During play, the player discovers that sometimes the price of 
immortality is too high; the overall goal of the game is to undo the damage that caused 
the character to become immortal. The game also has several different endings based on 
decisions the player makes near the end, among which is to—intentionally—die.
Fallout
The setting: A subterranean fallout shelter houses a thousand people after a nuclear 
holocaust. It’s been nearly 80 years, and you still don’t have any idea what’s out there. 
Sure you’ve sent out volunteer scouts, but none of them returned.
Now your water recycler has failed. Rationing has begun, but someone must leave the 
vault to get a replacement microchip for the water recycler and look for other survivors.
And you drew the short straw.
continues on next page
NOTE See Chapter 7 
for more information 
on game stories.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

476 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
OPENING STORIES
continued
At the beginning of this game, the player ﬁ nds his character locked outside of his vault, 
Vault 13. The immediate priority is survival. It’s dangerous outside the vault, and there is 
no way to return without the water chip. Fortunately for the player, it looks like the water 
chip will be easy to obtain. Vault 15 is only a day or two away, and provided that he can 
survive that long, it should be a reasonably easy matter to obtain a new chip.
Fallout’s story begins with a seemingly simple quest, but no apparent mystery. As the 
game goes on, complications arise: The water chip cannot be obtained from Vault 15. 
Vault 15 stands in ruins and the control room lies under tons of rock. This false ending 
approach is used more than once in Fallout. When the character does ﬁ nally get another 
water chip and returns to Vault 13, he realizes that Vault 15 was attacked—and that his 
actions have now revealed the location of his home vault to the same attackers. The 
adventure continues with the player now compelled to destroy the forces that threaten 
his home vault.
The opening uses the popular theme of returning home to good effect. The ironic twist at 
the end of the game, that his experiences in the outside world have changed the charac-
ter so much that he cannot return to his home vault, is an excellent example of 
storytelling in a role-playing game.
The Presentation Layer
Like strategy games, CRPGs have complicated core mechanics, and the player needs 
access to a large amount of information. In addition to the game world, the player 
needs to see critical information about the health (and possibly mana status) of 
each member of the party. Spellcasting characters require a menu of the spells that 
they currently have available.
Interaction Model
The interaction model for most single-player CRPGs is party-based, with the player 
controlling the activities of a small group of people who generally stay close 
together. In a few cases, most notably the Diablo games, the player controls a single 
avatar. In multiplayer online games, the interaction model is always avatar-based, 
though the player may have a familiar—a pet or companion who is also under the 
player’s control.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 
477
 CHAPTER 15
Camera Model
The interaction model you choose to implement determines what camera model 
works for you. With an avatar-based model, either ﬁ rst- or third-person perspective 
is possible in 3D games, and many games offer both. The ﬁ rst-person perspective is 
useful for talking with other characters and moving fast through terrain; the third-
person is more useful when the player wants to see her avatar ﬁ ghting, casting 
spells, and so on. Elder Scrolls III: Morrowind is a good example of a game that pro-
vides both (see Figure 15.8).
If you are using a party-based model, you will probably want an aerial perspective 
so the player can see all the members of the party at once and position them as he 
wishes in combat. The aerial perspective also lets the player see more of the sur-
rounding terrain, which helps characters explore and allows one character to scout 
a little way ahead for danger while still leaving the others visible on the screen. The 
isometric perspective was once the de facto standard for party-based play, but with 
the advent of 3D games, context-sensitive and free-roaming camera models are now 
commonplace.
FIGURE 15.8 
Elder Scrolls III: 
Morrowind in the 
third-person 
perspective


--- PAGE BREAK ---

478 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
User Interface
CRPGs usually permit a much greater range of possible actions for the player than 
games of other genres. Consequently, there is a corresponding increase in the com-
plexity of the interface. Most PC titles offer an interface in which the player uses 
the mouse to click icons—though some still offer a keyboard-only interface—while 
console titles tend to duplicate the functionality of a mouse using analog 
controllers.
Figure 15.9, from Knights of the Old Republic II: The Sith Lords, illustrates some of the 
complexities of CRPG interfaces. Contrast this with Figure 13.2 (right side) for a 
traditional action game, and with Figure 14.2 for a strategy game. Figure 15.9 
includes all the following elements: a mini-map (upper left); details about the cur-
rent health and status of an enemy (left center); combat options during battle 
(lower left and center); party portraits (lower right); and buttons for switching to 
other gameplay modes such as character and inventory management (upper right).
VISIBLE VERSUS HIDDEN MECHANICS
The ﬁ rst computerized games based on the Dungeons & Dragons system displayed 
actual die rolls on the screen so that the player could be conﬁ dent that the games 
were following the real D&D rules. That was over 20 years ago, and nowadays the 
FIGURE 15.9 
Knights of the Old 
Republic II: The Sith 
Lords during a combat 
sequence
TIP See Chapter 8, 
“User Interfaces,” for 
more information on 
user interface design. 
Much of the advice in 
that chapter is directly 
applicable to CRPGs. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

