ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 
481
 CHAPTER 15
Design Practice QUESTIONS
1. Which type of game are you going to create? Is it going to be heavy on story (as 
in the Final Fantasy games), or will character advancement and combat be the main 
thrust (as in NetHack)?
2. If it is story-based, how will you structure the quests? One big overarching quest 
with side quests or a more free-form approach? This will have an impact on the dif-
ﬁ culty of production and the feel of the game.
3. What is the setting for your game? Are you going for the standard science ﬁ ction/
fantasy fare, or are you using something else? Are you using a licensed work? Are you 
convinced that your setting is different yet recognizable enough to be compelling?
4. How will your world function? What are the underlying rules for the way the 
world works? Are they self-consistent and logical? Are they based on a preexisting 
system (as in Baldur’s Gate)?
5. Is the player going to be given a group of avatars, or will he be responsible for a 
single character? Will his character be conﬁ gurable (as in Arcanum), or will he be 
forced to take a predeﬁ ned role (as in Anachronox)?
6. What will be the primary focus of your game? Will it be uncovering the story, 
improving the player’s character, or combat and exploration? The majority of 
games attempt to cover all these bases equally, but some exceptional ones have 
focused more on one aspect, such as Anachronox and Diablo II. This affects the pace 
of your game.
7. What camera model will you use in your game? Will you use isometric 3D (as in 
the older BioWare games) or will you use a fully 3D engine (as in Fallout 3)? Will 
you use something else entirely?
8. Is your game going to include a magic system? How is this magic system going 
to be constructed? Will it be based on preexisting concepts, familiar regimes (such 
as law/chaos/good/evil) or something completely new? Will it be internally self-
consistent or not? How will it be balanced with nonmagic forces within the game?
9. How will you handle inventory management within the game?
10. And ﬁ nally, will your player’s character end up saving the world? Are you sure 
you want to do that? Can you think of anything slightly more original (as in 
Vampire: The Masquerade—Bloodlines, for example)?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER 16
482
Sports Games
Sports games create a special challenge for the game designer. So many people play 
or watch sports that they come to a video game with high expectations about what 
the game will be like, and a designer must learn to meet those expectations. Sports 
games are one of the most popular genres in all of video gaming, and a well-tuned 
game can turn into a highly enjoyable, and proﬁ table, product line.
This chapter discusses how the principles of game design apply to sports games. 
We’ll begin by formally deﬁ ning sports games and then address in detail the fea-
tures that characterize them. We’ll also talk about the legal issues you’ll encounter 
if you make a game with a team or league license. Most of the chapter is dedicated 
to the structure of sports games: the types of gameplay, the problems of mapping 
actions to user input devices, and the design of athlete AIs for a rewarding experi-
ence. For a designer, sports games offer the unique challenge of simulating well-
known game mechanics while at the same time modifying those mechanics to 
work with the video game hardware their players are using.
What Are Sports Games?
Two things only the people anxiously desire: bread and the circus games.
—JUVENAL
Unlike most other games, which take place in a world the player knows little about, 
sports games simulate a world the player knows a lot about: sporting events as they 
are in real life. No one has ever really led an army of elves into combat, and only a 
small number of people know how it feels to ﬂ y an F-16 ﬁ ghter jet, but a great many 
people know what professional football looks like and how the game is played. 
Sports games encourage direct comparison with the real world.
Not all sports games are ultrarealistic, of course. Some, such as Electronic Arts’ old 
Sega Genesis game Mutant League Football, are fantasy games even though they are 
based on real sports. Others, such as Midway’s Blitz football series, simplify a sport 
and deliberately make it more extreme for dramatic purposes. Most of these kinds 
of games are designed to appeal to kids, who might not know much about the real 
sport. But for dedicated fans, the game must be a reasonably accurate depiction of 
the real thing, and fans will see any deviation as a ﬂ aw.
SPORTS GAME A sports game simulates some aspect of a real or imaginary athletic sport, 
whether it is playing in matches, managing a team or career, or both. Match play uses 
physical and strategic challenges; the management challenges are chieﬂ y economic.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

SPORTS GAMES 
483
 CHAPTER 16
This chapter discusses athletic sports, as opposed to sports such as motor racing. 
Although racing games are often sold in the sports category, from a design stand-
point, they really belong in Chapter 17, “Vehicle Simulations.”
Game Features
Most sports games concentrate on simulating actual matches, but many also 
include a number of management functions as well—the challenges of managing
a team or an athlete’s career. A few sports games implement only this aspect of
the sport and don’t allow the player to control individual athletes in matches. 
Occasionally called manager games, these are particularly popular in Europe.
A NOTE ON SPORT GAMES TERMINOLOGY
Because sports games simulate other games, as opposed to a war, a race, or an eco-
nomic competition of some kind, the words player and game are ambiguous. Does player
refer to the person playing the video game or to one of the athletes playing the game on 
the ﬁ eld? This chapter uses the following convention: Player refers to the person playing 
the video game, as it does throughout the rest of the book. The people in the game are 
the athletes. Game refers to the video game. Match describes the contest being simulated 
by the game. The type of match that the athletes are playing (basketball or soccer, for 
example) is called the sport.
A great many sports involve a playing area with a goal at either end and athletes trying 
to manipulate some object into the goal. Basketball, ice hockey, water polo, and soccer 
are all examples. These are referred to collectively as soccerlike games.
Game Structure
The main gameplay mode in a sports game is match play, simulating the sport itself 
as it is played. Players can usually pause the game, which normally brings up a 
menu permitting them to substitute athletes, change the camera view, perform 
other sorts of coaching tasks, and sometimes adjust the AI. Players can also save
the game for later or abandon it.
Outside of match play, most of the game’s modes relate to other aspects of the 
sport: studying the athletes’ ratings and performance statistics, hiring and trading 
them, deciding who the starting athletes will be, and following the sport’s match 
or tournament schedule on a calendar. The screen layouts tend to reﬂ ect the book-
keeping nature of these activities, often resembling tables or graphs.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

484 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Player Roles
The player’s role is most commonly that of an athlete, but in a team sport, that 
doesn’t mean just one particular athlete. The player’s focus of control usually fol-
lows the action rather than being tied to a single individual. Thus, the player’s role 
shifts rapidly, especially if some athletes play specialized positions such as catcher 
or goalie.
The player may sometimes elect to play as the coach, again a role found chieﬂ y in 
team sports. The coach selects the starting athletes for the team, sets offensive and 
defensive strategies, and makes athlete substitutions during the match. See Figure 
16.1 for an example. The player usually switches to the coach role during timeouts 
or other pauses in the action.
Finally, there’s the role of general manager of the team. The general manager hires 
and ﬁ res athletes, trying to recruit the best athletes within the limitations of the 
budget. In a game that allows it, the manager also tries to build up the team over a 
period of years, improving its standing in the league.
FIGURE 16.1 
Madden NFL 09’s 
training camp screen, 
a coaching function 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

SPORTS GAMES 
485
 CHAPTER 16
Gameplay and Rules
The challenges and actions of a sports game are those of the actual sport but with 
the actions of the athletes’ bodies mapped onto the control devices of the game 
machine. Whatever the athletes try to achieve in the match, the player tries to 
achieve. In the coaching role, the challenges are to choose the most appropriate 
strategy for the moment from among those offered by the game and to manage the 
athletes so that they don’t become overtired or injured (assuming the game imple-
ments those concepts).
The rules of a sports game are, for the most part, the rules of the sport in the real 
world. You might ﬁ nd that you need to relax these rules in some areas, particularly 
with respect to faults, fouls, or judgment errors that the player might make. Because 
the player is using a handheld device to manipulate an athlete on-screen instead of 
playing on the ﬁ eld himself, it’s much more difﬁ cult to judge when his avatar is 
about to bump into someone, cross into a forbidden zone, and so on. A few games 
allow the player to set the level of computerized refereeing to forgiving or strict, 
depending on which way he likes to play.
You also have to decide if you want to simulate athlete mistakes that are outside the 
player’s control. For example, in American football, penalties are called for holding,
grabbing hold of another athlete instead of merely pushing him. This is an aspect 
of the sport that a computerized version might have difﬁ culty simulating and could 
avoid entirely: The game could simply make it impossible for one athlete to hold 
another. However a match in which no holding penalties ever occurred would feel 
unrealistic. On the other hand, a match in which the player is randomly penalized 
for holding when he hasn’t actually done anything wrong might be frustrating for 
some players. Allowing the player to adjust the refereeing mechanism can solve 
this problem. Under realistic refereeing, the game would generate penalties at ran-
dom at about the same rate at which they occur in real matches. Under relaxed 
refereeing, the game would not generate any penalties except for those actually 
under the player’s control.
Competition Modes
Sports games, unlike most other games, allow all possible modes of competition. 
Depending on the sport and on how many input devices your platform supports, 
you can offer single-player, competitive, cooperative, team, and league modes;
people love to play sports games competitively. Sports games sell far more copies for 
console machines than they do for PCs primarily because console machines allow 
many people to play at once in the same room. In addition, console versions can 
use a TV instead of a monitor on a desk, so all the players have a better view of the 
action. Because many real sports are played by teams of people, these sports natu-
rally offer opportunities for multiplayer action.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

486 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
One other competition mode you should consider including is one with no players 
at all: the computer versus itself. Few other games besides chess games ever imple-
ment this mode; after all, people play computer games to interact, not to watch. 
However, with sports games, people do occasionally like to let the game play itself 
and watch the results, just as if they were watching a real match on TV. This also 
allows the computer to play simulated matches that the player doesn’t want to play; 
see the later section “Simulating Matches Automatically.”
Victory and Loss Conditions
The victory and loss conditions for a match are the same as in the real sport. 
However, many games that simulate team or league sports offer players a variety of 
ways of playing the game, usually referred to simply as modes. (Note that these are 
not the same as competition modes or gameplay modes.)
■ Season mode. The player selects a single team (or athlete, for individual sports 
such as skiing) from all those available and plays a series of matches throughout a 
season, trying to make it into the championships. The schedule of play for the sea-
son and the rules for moving into and up the championship bracket are adopted 
from the real sport. Some season modes allow a player to play not just one team’s 
matches but every single match played throughout an entire season.
■ Exhibition mode. In this mode, the players play one single match, but it has no 
long-term consequences, just like exhibition matches (also called friendlies in the 
UK) played by real teams. Whoever wins the match wins the game.
■ Sudden death. As a variant of exhibition mode, players play a match only until 
the ﬁ rst score is made. Whoever makes the ﬁ rst score wins the game. This is handy 
for very quick games, although it means that luck plays a much greater role in 
determining the outcome.
■ Round robin. Players in a group each take a team and play each other’s team a 
ﬁ xed number of times, sometimes just once. Whoever has won the most matches at 
the end is the winner.
■ Tournament mode. In a single-elimination tournament, any player who loses 
any match is dropped, and the winner goes on to play the winner of another 
match. This requires that the number of players be a power of two. You may orga-
nize tournaments in other ways as well.
■ Franchise mode, also called dynasty mode. The player controls a team over the 
course of several seasons, trying to build its strength through the years. This mode 
often appears in games that include mechanisms for hiring athletes and trading 
them among teams. For games such as tennis, in which most athletes play alone, 
the equivalent mode is called career mode—that is, the player controls the athlete 
over the course of several years of his or her career.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

SPORTS GAMES 
487
 CHAPTER 16
Opportunities for Creative Play
As sports games are essentially simulations, they offer fewer opportunities for
creative play than other genres. However, several do exist:
■ Athlete and team creation. You may give the players the opportunity to create 
teams of their own, either by choosing athletes from the existing database or by 
entering new athletes with all their attributes (see Figure 16.2). This will allow 
players to create dream teams or famous teams from the past. If you want to pre-
vent them from creating unbeatable teams, you can require that the sum of all the 
attributes of all the athletes on the team must not go over a certain limit. (Strange 
though it sounds, once players know they can create unbeatable teams or unbeat-
able play strategies, they lose some respect for the game.)
■ Strategy design. Players greatly enjoy setting up their own strategies, adjusting 
how the athletes will behave and what roles they will play in a team sport. You will 
have to work closely with the programmers, who implement the game’s strategy 
and AI to determine what parameters the player can change. One risk of allowing 
the players to design their own strategy is that they may hit upon some combina-
tion that the game AI is completely unable to beat, regardless of the circumstances. 
FIGURE 16.2 
The athlete-creation 
screen in Pro Evolution 
Soccer 2008


--- PAGE BREAK ---

488 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Allowing the players to design their own strategies will require the development 
team to do a lot more testing in order to prevent this.
■ Playing ﬁ eld design. Most sports rigidly deﬁ ne the shape of the ﬁ eld. However, 
in a few cases (baseball, cricket), the boundaries of the ﬁ eld may be variable. You 
can allow the player to edit the shape of the playing ﬁ eld or import new playing 
ﬁ elds made in other tools.
Miscellaneous Issues
If you want to, you can invent a completely new sport for your game, but this 
approach is not always a commercial success. Sports games also include two fea-
tures not usually found in other games: weather and instant replay (the ability to 
watch an action again in slow motion). This section addresses these issues, which 
don’t generally apply to other genres.
INVENTED SPORTS
From time to time, someone tries to create a sports video game of a completely 
invented sport as opposed to a simulation of an existing one. Experience shows 
that this is a risky enterprise. Hardcore sports gamers seldom take an interest in 
completely new sports; they’d rather play a game that simulates a sport they’re 
already familiar with. Other types of gamers aren’t particularly interested in sports 
games anyway, so they aren’t very likely to want to play a one-off sports game 
unless it appeals to them for some other reason. If you’re thinking of inventing a 
new sport, you should design it primarily as a video game rather than designing it 
as an athletic sport for humans to play and then converting it to a video game.
This is how Empire Interactive designed Speedball; although theoretically a sport, 
Speedball includes powerups and other arcade-game elements to make it more inter-
esting to people who don’t normally like sports games.
One of the trickiest aspects of sports game design is mapping real-world activities 
to a limited input device. Players are willing to tolerate some awkwardness in the 
user interface when it’s a real sport because they understand the problems, but with 
an invented sport, they’re unlikely to be so generous. When designing a completely 
new sport, you might consider working backward from the controller to the sport 
itself, designing around the limitations of your hardware.
WEATHER
Many sports have special rules regarding weather conditions: Rain stops play in 
baseball but not in football, and so on. The weather can deﬁ nitely affect the play. 
Rain and snow make traction difﬁ cult, reducing the athletes’ ability to accelerate 
and lowering the top speed that they can reach. Equipment becomes slippery and 
more difﬁ cult to control when it’s wet. Hot, humid days cause athletes to tire out 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

SPORTS GAMES 
489
 CHAPTER 16
more easily. Think about how the weather affects the athletes, playing ﬁ eld, and 
equipment, and adjust your core mechanics appropriately.
INSTANT REPLAY
Instant replay is now an essential part of watching sports on television, so naturally 
video game players want it as well. To implement instant replay, your game will 
need to keep track of the exact position and animation step of every athlete and all 
the equipment on the ﬁ eld or be able to reliably recreate them.  The amount of data 
storage available will limit how much information you can keep around in case the 
player wants to see it again. When possible, select  natural boundaries in the game-
play as the point to begin recording: in baseball, when the ball is pitched; in 
American football, when the ball is snapped. In continuously ﬂ owing games such 
as basketball, you might need to establish an artiﬁ cial time limit.
A good many games now show an instant replay automatically after important 
events, to better re-create the experience of watching the sport on television. Some 
players ﬁ nd this annoying, however, because it breaks up the ﬂ ow of the game. All 
sports games should include instant replay, but players should be able to interrupt 
the instant replay and to switch the automatic replay off if they want to. Wii Sports 
provides an automatic instant replay that the player can interrupt by pressing the 
A button.
The best instant-replay mechanisms allow all the following features for maximum 
ﬂ exibility:
■ Play, stop, fast-forward, rewind, and single-frame advance and reverse operations 
to allow the player to see exactly what happened at every instant.
■ The ability to move the camera in all three dimensions to a different position 
above the ﬁ eld or court, and to pitch the camera up and down and pan left and 
right. (This assumes you are using a 3D graphics engine. With a 2D engine you 
should at least allow the player to move the camera around unless the ﬁ eld or court 
ﬁ lls the screen.)
■ The ability to lock the camera to a given athlete or to the ball in order to follow 
that athlete or ball wherever it goes. This is usually done by showing a symbol on 
the ground that represents the camera’s focus of attention. If the symbol is directly 
under an athlete’s feet when the player stops moving the camera, the camera locks 
onto that athlete.
Instant replay lets the players see the action from perspectives that they can’t use 
when actually playing the game. For the game’s publisher and developer, this kind 
of instant replay is an invaluable tool for grabbing dramatic screen shots or game-
play footage for sales and demonstrations. You should consider it an essential 
feature of any sports game that you design.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

490 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
THE MADDEN NFL SERIES
Madden NFL is one of the longest-established and best-selling game franchises in the history of the industry. 
From its earliest beginnings on the Apple II, it has grown into a ﬁ nancial powerhouse that produces a new edition 
on several different platforms every year and makes millions of dollars for its publisher, Electronic Arts. Versions 
of Madden have appeared for personal computers and every major console machine ever produced.
Madden is not redesigned every year, nor is its code rewritten. Electronic Arts updates its artwork and video 
sequences and adds new features each year, but it undertakes a complete overhaul only every four or ﬁ ve years—
often when a new generation of game console appears. The majority of the design work each year consists of 
tuning and improving the gameplay and adding more features. These features expand the football experience
to include aspects of the sport that go beyond playing a single match against another team, including:
•  Ability to hire and trade athletes among teams, subject to the limitations of the salary cap established by 
the NFL.
• Participation in the NFL draft.
• Detailed performance statistics on athletes.
• Season, tournament, and practice modes.
•  Franchise mode, letting players take a team through several seasons in an effort to build a dynasty.
• A play editor, allowing players to customize their playbooks.
•  Training camp mode, in which the players can practice and get to know the capabilities of the athletes on their 
team. Recent editions of Madden use this feature to collect data about the player’s skills, and automatically 
adjust the difﬁ culty of the game to compensate.
•  Adjustable AI, enabling players to set the coaching stances of computer-controlled teams to aggressive,
neutral, or conservative.
• Arcade mode, a simpliﬁ ed and exaggerated form of the game.
As you can see, even though the sport itself changes little from year to year, you can always add new features
and details to a sports game.
By far the largest single design task in developing Madden every year is research: rating the skills of the real ath-
letes who appear in the game, keeping track of which team they’re playing for, ﬁ nding photographs of them, and 
so on. In addition to researching the athletes, the game developers must research the coaches—trying to ﬁ nd out 
what kinds of plays they like to run, whether they’re aggressive or conservative, and so on. The game developers 
must also update each team’s playbooks every year to reﬂ ect changes in coaching practice, and test the new plays 
to make sure that they’re effective but not unstoppable.
In short, Madden is a highly successful sports game that offers its players a wide range of playing styles, from the 
quick and easy arcade game to the detailed minutiae of designing plays and adjusting rosters. As a game that 
tries to do it all, it’s well worth studying.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

SPORTS GAMES 
491
 CHAPTER 16
Core Mechanics
Football is brutal only from a distance. In the middle of it there’s a calm, a tranquility… 
When the systems interlock, there’s a satisfaction to the game that can’t be duplicated. 
There’s a harmony.
—DON DELILLO, END ZONE
Sports games present a number of design issues that designers of other kinds of 
games rarely encounter. This section covers issues raised by the physics, AI, athlete 
skill ratings, and other aspects peculiar to sports games.
Physics for Sports Games
During play, your game will be running a physics engine that determines the 
behavior of moving bodies in the match. The physical behavior of an inanimate 
object such as a baseball is comparatively easy to implement. The physical behavior 
of humans, however, is much more complicated. Early sports games tended to treat 
a running athlete rather like a rocket: She had a velocity vector that gave the speed 
and direction of her movement and an acceleration vector that gave the force and 
direction with which she pushed. Modern sports games have much richer simula-
tions with a great many variables, taking into account such things as the friction 
coefﬁ cient of the playing surface—for example, rain and snow make ﬁ elds slippery 
and reduce traction.
Designing the physics simulation for a sports game is a highly technical problem 
and is beyond the scope of this book. However, beware: Because a sports game is a 
simulation of the real world, it is a common error to think that the physics in a 
sports game should be as realistic as possible. It shouldn’t be, for two reasons:
■ First, the player is not actually running around on the playing ﬁ eld herself; she 
is watching a screen and controlling an athlete through a handheld controller. She 
has neither the immediate experience of being on the ﬁ eld nor the precise control 
over her movements that a real athlete does.
■ Second, the player is not a professional athlete. There is a good reason why only 
a small number of people can hit a baseball pitched at 95 miles per hour. The 
length of time that the ball is within reach of the bat is about 0.04 seconds. It’s 
simply not realistic to expect that an ordinary person looking at a video screen 
without the beneﬁ t of depth perception could react quickly enough to “hit” a ball 
thrown at this speed.
For both of these reasons, you need to adjust the physics to make the game play-
able. In a baseball game, slow the pitch to give the batter a reasonable chance of 
hitting the ball, and artiﬁ cially adjust the position of the bat so that it intersects 
the path of the ball. Whether the physics perfectly copies that of the real world 
doesn’t matter as much as whether the game seems to be producing a reasonable 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

492 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
simulation of the sport as it is played by professionals. Even in a highly realistic 
game, your objective is to provide an enjoyable experience, not a mathematical 
simulation of nature.
Rating the Athletes
One of the biggest tasks you take on in designing a sports game is developing a rat-
ing system for the skills and athletic abilities of all the athletes in the game. The 
rating system provides the raw data that the physics engine needs to accurately 
simulate the behavior of the athletes. As your programming team develops the 
physics engine and game AI, you should work with them to determine what ratings 
are needed. Researching the athletes’ performances and setting the ratings for them 
can take many months, and the lead designer will probably want to delegate it to 
junior designers or assistant producers.
In most team games, all athletes share one set of ratings, plus specialized ratings 
that apply only to athletes playing a particular position.
COMMON RATINGS
The kinds of ratings that might be common to all the athletes in a game include:
■ Speed. The athlete’s maximum moving (running or skating or swimming) speed 
under ideal conditions.
■ Agility. A measure of the athlete’s ability to change directions while moving.
■ Weight. The athlete’s weight, which affects the force he transmits in a collision 
and the inertia he has when struck by someone else.
■ Acceleration. The rate at which the athlete can reach top speed.
■ Jumping. The height to which the athlete can jump.
■ Endurance. The rate at which the athlete gets tired during the course of
the game.
■ Injury resistance. The probability that an athlete will, or will not, be injured 
during play.
SPECIALIZED RATINGS
Some ratings apply to a speciﬁ c position—this example uses the quarterback in 
American football:
■ Passing strength. The distance that the quarterback can throw the ball.
■ Passing accuracy. The precision with which the quarterback can throw the ball.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

SPORTS GAMES 
493
 CHAPTER 16
■ Dexterity. The quarterback’s general dexterity in handling the ball. This affects 
his chances of dropping the snap or fumbling a handoff.
■ Awareness. The quarterback’s ability to sense that he’s about to be tackled and 
to try to get out of the way.
Athlete AI Design
In action games and ﬁ rst-person shooters, the player’s AI-driven opponents typi-
cally exhibit a small number of behaviors each triggered by a speciﬁ c event 
(appearance of the player on the scene, being shot at, and so on). When together in 
a group, the AI seldom assigns special roles to particular individuals or instructs 
them to help each other. It’s every monster for itself.
These kinds of actions aren’t acceptable in a sports game. People don’t mind if a 
monster in a ﬁ rst-person shooter wanders aimlessly around, but the athletes in a 
sports game must behave like humans, and that means deliberate, intelligent 
action. Particularly in team games, each athlete works with the others on the team 
to accomplish particular goals. The position the athlete plays dictates behavior to 
some extent, but within those boundaries, the athlete still must respond intelli-
gently to a number of possible events. In a relatively simple simulation such as 
tennis, there might not be many of these events, but a highly complex simulation 
such as American football, with 22 players on the ﬁ eld at a time, presents hundreds 
of them.
DEFINING THE STATE SPACE
The play in a sports match can be broken down into states that are deﬁ ned primar-
ily by the rules and secondarily by the tactics and strategy of the game. For 
example, the period of time before a tennis player serves the ball is one state, and 
the rules dictate where she may stand and what actions she may take (and likewise 
for her opponent). The moment she serves the ball, the game enters a new state. 
The moment the ball passes over the net, it enters another one, and so on. The best 
way to design a sports-game AI is to map out a game’s states as a giant ﬂ owchart. 
There could be far more states than you realize at ﬁ rst. Corner kick in soccer is not 
just one state but several: the period before the ball is kicked, after the kick but 
before the ball touches another athlete, after it has been touched by another ath-
lete, and so on. See Figure 16.3 (next page) for a partial example.
Consult the ofﬁ cial rules of the sport as you construct the ﬂ owchart; they often 
describe states in detail, with special rules applying to each. However, the rules 
alone are not enough—rules describe game states for the purposes of listing legal 
and illegal actions, but not for purposes of tactics or strategy. Whenever something 
changes that requires the athletes to adopt a different tactic, the game has moved 
into a different state.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

494 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
SETTING COLLECTIVE AND INDIVIDUAL GOALS
After you deﬁ ne the game states, you can start thinking about what the team 
should do in each state—where each athlete should be trying to go and what he 
should be trying to do to support the team’s collective goal at that moment. In 
some cases, these activities are deﬁ ned with reference to a speciﬁ c individual on 
the opposing team, for example, trying to prevent an opposing player from doing 
his job. The software must have a way of matching up athletes with their oppo-
nents, just as the real athletes do.
After you deﬁ ne what the team should be trying to accomplish in a particular state 
and have assigned each athlete a role, you then must deﬁ ne exactly how the athlete 
is to perform that role: what direction he moves, what other movements he makes, 
which animations should be displayed, and so on.
An athlete with nothing to do shouldn’t just stand still. Most sports games include 
ﬁ dgets, short animations in which the athlete shifts his weight, stretches his arms, 
or makes some other neutral action every few seconds. If play is under way, an ath-
lete not closely involved—the third baseman on a ﬂ y ball to right ﬁ eld, for instance—
should turn and watch the action.
FIGURE 16.3 
A ﬂ owchart detailing 
part of the corner kick 
situation in soccer 
Ball in Air
Before 
Corner Kick
Ball Kicked
Indirect 
Free Kick to 
Opponents
Kicker 
touches ball
Corner Kick is 
Retaken
Out of 
bounds
Normal Play 
Continues
Ball touches 
another player
Direct 
Free Kick to 
Opponents
Kicker handles 
ball outside the 
penalty area
Penalty 
Kick to 
Opponents
Kicker handles 
ball inside the 
penalty area


--- PAGE BREAK ---

SPORTS GAMES 
495
 CHAPTER 16
Like war games, team sports games are good candidates for using hierarchical ﬁ nite 
state machines to produce the artiﬁ cially intelligent behavior required. Two-player 
sports can use simple ﬁ nite state machines, one for each player. See the discussion 
on ﬁ nite state machines at the end of Chapter 14, “Strategy Games.”
Injuries
I wouldn’t ever set out to hurt anybody deliberately unless it was, you know, important—
like a league game or something.
—DICK BUTKUS, NFL LINEBACKER
Injuries are a sad but common side effect of sports, and serious simulations take 
them into account. Because injuries occur somewhat randomly, they’re outside the 
player’s control and can be frustrating. Most sports games allow the players to turn 
off injuries if they don’t like the effect that injuries have on the game.
Although it’s possible for an athlete to injure herself simply by running or jumping, 
this doesn’t provide the player with any visible explanation for why the injury 
occurred. A lot of sports games therefore limit injuries to cases of some kind of col-
lision, ordinarily between two athletes. To determine whether an injury occurs, you 
should include such factors as the relative speed of the two athletes, their weights, 
their respective susceptibilities to injury, and a random probability just to introduce 
some uncertainty into the situation. The heavier an athlete is, the more force she 
imparts in a collision, and it is the force that does the damage to the other athlete.
The stress of playing some positions, such as pitching in baseball, can injure an 
athlete without a collision, with injuries becoming more likely the longer the 
pitcher stays in the game. You can compute the probability of an injury on every 
pitch and raise the probability slightly with each ball thrown.
You can also decide which part of the body sustains the injury and the length of 
time for which it will disable the athlete. Study reports of injuries and recovery 
times for the sport you are simulating. If your game tracks athletes over a period
of time, you should consider the cumulative effect of injury and recovery time on 
their careers.
Arcade Mode Versus Simulation Mode
Switching into arcade mode skews the play toward lots of action and relatively few 
slow-paced game states, such as strikeouts or walks. Arcade mode makes the game 
more exciting at the expense of realism; simulation mode makes it a more accurate 
simulation of the real sport at some expense in fun. In baseball, for example, an 
athlete does well to achieve a .333 batting average—that is, gets a hit only once for 
every three at bats. Some players may ﬁ nd that a little dull. Switching the game to 
arcade mode could let the player get a hit 50 percent of the time or even more. In 
American football, you can artiﬁ cially increase the number of completed passes by 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

496 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
improving the quarterback’s throwing accuracy and the receiver’s catching skills. If 
you allow the player to switch between arcade mode and simulation mode, he can 
adjust the behavior of the game to suit his tastes.
To implement arcade mode, you have to decide what sort of changes to the real 
game would make it more exciting. If you want your game to have both arcade and 
simulation modes, start with the serious simulation ﬁ rst and then create the adjust-
ments that make it arcadelike. Serious simulations are much more difﬁ cult to tune, 
and it’s important to get them right ﬁ rst. If you start with an arcadelike design and 
then try to make it serious, you might never get it right.
Simulating Matches Automatically
Sports games that simulate an entire season for a whole league of teams often pro-
vide a means of simulating matches automatically without the player’s having to 
play them. Each team in American professional baseball currently plays 162 
matches in a season. With 30 teams in the two leagues and 2 teams in each match, 
this totals 2430 matches—only the most rabid fan would want to play each match 
personally. To generate results for matches that the player doesn’t play, you need a 
way of simulating a match. Of course, you want the resulting scores to accurately 
reﬂ ect the relative strengths of the teams: A bad team should be able to beat a good 
team occasionally but not often.
COMPUTER VERSUS COMPUTER
The simplest way to simulate matches automatically is to let the computer play out 
the match in computer versus computer mode (as described in the earlier section 
“Competition Modes”) and record the results. A game with a good simulation 
model should produce scores that reﬂ ect the real abilities of the competitors.
However, if the player wants to generate results for a match that she doesn’t want to 
play herself, she probably wants it done quickly. You can speed up the process by 
turning off the graphics. Because displaying the graphics often takes up the major-
ity of the computer’s time, an entire match can be simulated invisibly in a few 
seconds, and the computer can report only the result. Electronic Arts’ Earl Weaver 
Baseball game did this successfully. When you implement a nondisplayed mode like 
this, test the game to be sure that the results without graphics are the same as those 
with graphics.
GENERATING FAKE RESULTS
Instead of simulating entire matches with the graphics turned off, many games fake 
it—in effect, they roll dice to generate game scores. The dice are loaded somewhat 
so that good teams get high scores and bad teams get low ones, and whichever 
team rolls the highest score wins the match.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

SPORTS GAMES 
497
 CHAPTER 16
If you choose this approach, you will need to devise a suitable algorithm for gener-
ating point values; in games such as American football and rugby, in which 
different kinds of scores produce different numbers of points (touchdown, ﬁ eld 
goal, and so on), certain score values are much more common than others. It’s 
extremely rare, for example, for a team to end an American football game with a 
score of 2. You’ll also need to make sure that your algorithm creates reasonable 
scores and a reasonably random distribution of scores. No professional soccer game 
should ever end with a winning score over about 15, and even that will be rare; 
your algorithm should produce many more games with winning scores of 4 or less.
Unfortunately, the dice-rolling technique doesn’t generate any statistics other than 
the scores themselves. In a particularly statistics-rich sport such as baseball, if you 
don’t generate performance data for each individual athlete, some fans will con-
sider your game to be a lightweight simulation rather than a serious one. It’s up to 
you to decide just how important that market is to you and how much effort you’re 
prepared to exert to meet their expectations.
Home-Field Advantage
Considerable debate has raged over the years about whether to build a home-ﬁ eld 
advantage into sports games. Although the home-ﬁ eld advantage is statistically
signiﬁ cant in a number of sports, it’s better not to build it into the mechanics of 
the game. Players like to feel that they are playing a fair game, and if they know 
that the odds are artiﬁ cially stacked against them whenever they play an away 
game, they will resent it. It’s also unclear exactly how the home-ﬁ eld advantage 
should be implemented. Fans normally observe the home-ﬁ eld advantage from 
win-loss statistics, but of course, the computer can’t simply turn a loss into a win. 
You could shave off a percentage of goal-scoring attempts, but even this slight 
intervention is likely to generate odd side effects. If a scoring attempt that clearly 
should have succeeded fails for no visible reason, the players are bound to notice it. 
If you feel you must simulate home-ﬁ eld advantage, the best (and least detectable) 
way to do it is probably to improve all the ratings slightly for all the athletes on
the home team.
The Game World
The setting of your game will be the normal venue for the sport, usually a stadium 
or an arena. It adds a great deal of verisimilitude to present these as accurate copies 
of real places. Players enjoy being able to recognize the architectural details of their 
favorite stadiums. Some sports, such as basketball or American football, require a 
playing area of a ﬁ xed shape and size, but others do not—different baseball ﬁ elds 
famously have different effects on gameplay. Some sports, such as skiing and bob-
sledding, take place in venues that vary enormously and require a great deal of 
practice to learn.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

498 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
The crowd also contributes signiﬁ cantly to the setting. Although you won’t want to 
devote a lot of graphical resources to spectators, the sounds of a crowd add greatly 
to the atmosphere. Increase the volume at tense moments. Let the players hear 
chants if it’s the kind of match at which spectators chant; add cheering after a score 
by the home team and a sudden silence after a score by the visitors. Horns, whis-
tles, and vendors calling out, “Ice-cold beer here!” are all part of the experience.
Licenses, Trademarks, and Publicity Rights
Many years ago, small developers could make and sell computer games using names 
such as NFL and get away with it because the National Football League never knew 
about it. You can’t do this now. Interactive entertainment is big business, and 
you have to be scrupulously careful to avoid violating trademarks or personal pub-
licity rights.
TEAM AND LEAGUE TRADEMARKS
The exact details vary from league to league and country to country, but generally 
in America the professional leagues hold the license to use the names, logos, uniform 
designs, and other indicia of all the teams in a league, plus the name and logo of 
the league itself. Colleges and universities normally belong to a governing body 
such as the National Collegiate Athletics Association in the USA, which represents 
their collective interests. You or your publisher will have to negotiate an agreement 
with the league or governing body to use these symbols in your game. If you do not 
have such an agreement, you can refer to teams only by their towns (such as San 
Francisco or Madrid) rather than their team names, and you may not use their 
logos, uniform colors, or other identifying marks.
A variety of governing bodies in different countries around the world manage 
individual sports such as gymnastics or ﬁ gure skating. The names and indicia of 
particular events, such as the Kentucky Derby, belong to the organizations that 
produce them—in this case, the Churchill Downs racetrack. In recent years, these 
groups have begun to exploit their intellectual property rights in a variety of ways, 
so they tend to come down hard on anything that seems to be an infringement. 
Don’t assume that just because an event has been around for decades you can freely 
use its name.
PERSONAL PUBLICITY RIGHTS
You cannot use the name or photograph of a real athlete without permission. An 
athlete’s name and likeness make up part of his personal publicity rights, and of 
course, famous athletes sell the rights to use their names for millions of dollars 
when they endorse a particular product as an individual. You might need to negoti-
ate with an organization that licenses the rights to use all the athletes’ names 
collectively. This might be the league in some cases; in others, however, including 
the NFL and Major League Baseball, you have to contact the athletes’ unions. In 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

SPORTS GAMES 
499
 CHAPTER 16
college sports, the rules will be different again. Unless you have the endorsement
of a speciﬁ c athlete, you must make sure that your game displays all athletes in 
approximately the same way, or endorsement could be implied. You can’t make it 
look as if an athlete has endorsed your game when that’s not the case.
Photographs present further difﬁ culties. You must obtain a license from the person 
in the photograph and also the photograph’s copyright holder (usually the person 
who took the photograph). Again, some governing bodies use special clearing-
houses for these kinds of things: NFL Photos, a special department of the NFL, 
licenses still photos for all the photographers who are accredited to take pictures at 
NFL matches. The license from the copyright holder, however, does not grant you 
the personal publicity rights of the athlete in the picture; you have to obtain those 
separately. You can also license photos from the trading card companies, as well as 
from journalistic bodies such as the Associated Press, and from private photo libraries.
In short, the whole issue of rights in sports games is a legal mineﬁ eld. Nowadays, even 
the stadiums might claim special rights, and many stadium owners auction the name 
of the stadium to the highest bidder, as with AT&T Park (the San Francisco baseball 
stadium). As a designer, you probably won’t have to deal with obtaining all these 
licenses yourself, but you should know that it’s not safe to specify simply that a 
game will use all the team and athlete names and photos. Obtaining them and the 
right to use them is a very costly and time-consuming business. It’s best to design 
the game in such a way that it doesn’t depend on having these things unless you’re 
certain that they will be available.
Audio Commentary
Most sports games try to reproduce the experience of watching the sport on television. 
An important part of that experience is hearing the announcers’ commentary, or 
play-by-play. Most TV and radio sports broadcasts include at least two people, the play-
by-play announcer and the color commentator. The play-by-play announcer describes 
the action on a moment-by-moment basis. The color commentator, usually a retired 
coach or player, offers insights into strategy and tactics, as well as background material 
on the teams or individual athletes. To make the player feel she’s right there in the 
stands, you might include a third voice, that of the stadium announcer over the public 
address system. His remarks tend to be quite formulaic, although they do occasion-
ally include requests to move badly parked cars, retrieve found children, and so on.
To study what kinds of things your audio commentary will need to do, record a TV 
broadcast of a real match and then transcribe everything that is said and who said 
it. Do this for two or three matches, and you will begin to notice patterns in the 
play-by-play: The announcers tend to read out the score at particular times, they 
use certain repetitive language, and so on. As you watch the match on videotape, 
take note of the different kinds of events that occur and the different remarks these 
events elicit from the commentators. The events that provoke a reaction from the 
color commentator aren’t necessarily the same events that trigger a response from 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

500 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
the play-by-play announcer. The color commentator speaks at more dramatic 
moments or when an athlete has done something particularly spectacular (or par-
ticularly bad). For example, in tennis, you might have a color comment such as, 
“She’s having a terrible time with those double faults!” when an athlete commits 
four double faults in a single game. Remember, a commentator would use this line 
only once, not after every subsequent double fault.
When you need to create commentary for a set of match events, sit down with the 
programmers and discuss the events to make sure the software can detect them. 
Some, such as a strikeout in baseball, will be uncomplicated, but many events will 
be judgment calls. A dropped pass in football that the athlete really should have 
caught, for instance, is not so easily detectable; you can detect the dropped pass, 
but what determines whether the receiver should have caught it? The probability of 
the receiver’s catching the pass must be calculated from such things as the receiv-
er’s dexterity rating and the accuracy with which the quarterback threw the pass in 
the ﬁ rst place—provided that the ball wasn’t tipped away by a defender. It’s always 
best to err on the side of caution in these cases: Don’t design judgment calls that 
the player is likely to disagree with, or he’ll think you’ve delivered a stupid game. 
As the saying goes, “It’s better to remain silent and be thought a fool than to open 
one’s mouth and remove all doubt.”
Don’t forget the introductory and wrap-up material at the beginning and end of the 
match—commentary such as, “Welcome to Invesco Field for today’s game between 
the New England Patriots and the Denver Broncos. It’s a cold and windy day.”
For more detailed information on writing commentary scripts, including the many 
tricky issues associated with assembling commentary out of speech fragments, read 
Chapter 13, “Interchangeable Dialogue Content,” of Game Writing: Narrative Skills 
for Videogames, edited by Chris Bateman (Bateman, 2006).
The Presentation Layer
Sports games offer some of the most beautifully realistic graphics and audio of any 
genre, and their presentation features borrow heavily from those seen on televi-
sion. TV sports presentations have their own particular look and feel, which change 
from time to time, and many game art directors take their cue from them.
Interaction Model
The interaction model in sports games varies considerably depending on the sport, 
but in most cases, the player controls an avatar who is an athlete in the match. In 
one-on-one sports such as tennis, this is straightforward, but in team sports, the 
player’s control typically switches automatically from one athlete to another as the 
focus of play changes. In basketball games, for example, control switches to the 
athlete who has the ball. If the player’s team is on defense, most games allow the 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

SPORTS GAMES 
501
 CHAPTER 16
player to choose which athlete to control and allow him to switch quickly from one 
athlete to another as conditions change. This often requires signiﬁ cant changes to 
the user interface as play progresses; the functions of the buttons have to change if 
the player assumes control of an athlete with a specialized function—for example, 
switching from the thrower to a sweeper in curling after delivering the rock.
Camera Models
In one-on-one sports games, the camera model is seldom difﬁ cult to manage. 
Choose a spot where the camera gives a clear view of the athletes and where their 
movements and activities will map neatly onto the machine’s input devices. As a 
general rule, you shouldn’t do sports games in the ﬁ rst person. A lot of the fun of 
watching a sport is in seeing the athletes exercise their skills. For example, you 
could make a tennis game in the ﬁ rst person, but you wouldn’t get to see your ath-
lete playing tennis, and you might not even get to see your racket hit the ball. An 
overhead perspective, with your tennis player at the bottom of the screen and your 
opponent at the top, presents a much more natural view and lets you see both ath-
letes running, jumping, serving, and so on.
Managing the camera for a team game is trickier, particularly when the focus of 
attention moves from place to place. With most soccerlike games, an end view or
a side view, from a somewhat elevated position, works best. With large ﬁ elds, you 
won’t be able to get the whole ﬁ eld on the screen, so you’ll need to design an intel-
ligent camera that follows the ball.
Sports in which actions take place at widely separated locations pose a special chal-
lenge in choosing a perspective. In most sports, the action takes place around one 
focal point: the leader of a race, the ball in most ballgames, the skier on the slope. 
Sports such as baseball and cricket, however, offer two focal points: on the ball and 
on the runners. In baseball, the two focal points can be separated by as much as 
400 feet. You can’t show both the runners and the ball without zooming out to a 
blimp view so high that it’s difﬁ cult to see anything clearly.
Most baseball video games implement a picture-in-picture solution: The camera
follows the ball, but a small diagram of the baseball diamond in one corner of the 
screen shows the positions of the runners, often indicated by colored dots (see 
Figure 16.4). When a runner reaches a base, his dot changes color to indicate that 
he is safe. The player controlling the ﬁ elders watches the main screen, and the one 
controlling the runners watches the diagram (keeping one eye on the main screen 
to see if the ball is coming). Because cricket uses only two stumps instead of four 
bases, this arrangement works even better.
NOTE  Some angles 
don’t work at all. 
American football is
almost unplayable 
from a side view
because too many
athletes block the 
player’s view of other 
athletes, and he can’t 
see gaps in the line.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

502 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
User Interface Design
In most other genres, the controls work the same way in most situations, and if 
their functions change, they do so only in response to explicit actions by the player. 
Sports games are unusual in this regard; the user interface changes on a second-by-
second basis, depending on conditions in the match itself. American football is a 
particularly complex example. On each play, the player on offense selects the for-
mation and play to run; calls signals and makes adjustments at the line of scrimmage; 
and then takes the snap and either hands off the ball, passes it, or runs with it
himself. If he passes it, control switches to the receiver and a whole series of new 
options for running, jumping, diving, and dodging defenders comes into play. 
Each of these different states requires that certain moves or choices be assigned to 
buttons on the controller, and these assignments change rapidly as play progresses.
INPUT DEVICES
The hardest thing about sports game user interface design is that you have to map 
athletic activities—complex motions of the whole human body—onto a game 
machine’s input device, which until recently was typically a handheld controller 
with joysticks and binary buttons. Of all the genres of game, the motion-sensing 
FIGURE 16.4 
The pitcher’s view in 
MVP Baseball 2005.
Note the inset showing 
the baserunners’ posi-
tions as circles on the 
diamond and small 
windows showing the 
runners themselves. 
TIP Be forgiving. 
The Nintendo Wii 
owes its huge success 
to the fact that inex-
perienced players can 
pick up the Wii Sports
game and have a good 
time. Nintendo wisely 
adjusted the game so 
that even poor players 
can hit a fastball or 
bowl a strike now 
and then.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

