506 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
12. What states can the game be in, even in times between active play? How does an 
athlete behave in each state? What are her goals in each state, and in team play, 
what is the collective goal of the team in each state? How does the individual ath-
lete’s behavior contribute to meeting the team’s goal?
13. Are you going to offer automatic simulation of matches? How will that be done?
14. What will the audio commentary be like? What events will it cover?
15. How does instant replay work?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 CHAPTER 17
Vehicle Simulations
Vehicle simulations create the feeling of driving or ﬂ ying a vehicle, real or imagi-
nary. In simulations of real vehicles, one of the chief goals is verisimilitude, an 
(apparently!) close relationship to reality. You can expect your players to know a lot 
about these machines and to want an experience that is at least visually similar to 
that of really controlling one. The machine’s gross performance characteristics 
(speed and maneuverability) should also be similar to reality, although its ﬁ ner 
details probably can’t be, for reasons you’ll learn in this chapter.
If you’re designing an imaginary vehicle, you’re free to create any kind of driving 
experience that you like without being restricted by such things as gravity, 
G-forces, fuel capacity, and so on. Your game really needs to just create the feeling 
of movement; you can place whatever limitations you like on that movement.
In this chapter, you’ll learn the deﬁ nition of vehicle simulations and then explore 
the core mechanics of various types of them. The chapter focuses primarily on 
driving and ﬂ ying simulations, spending a lot of time discussing the creation of 
military simulations. We’ll also review the game environment requirements, the 
look and camera angles best suited for these simulations, and the behaviors of arti-
ﬁ cial opponents.
What Are Vehicle Simulations?
Vehicle simulations cover several environments and game mechanics. They can be 
in the air, on the ground, on water, or in space. They can include races against 
other players or artiﬁ cially intelligent opponents, or they can involve exploration 
or simply the experience of using the vehicle. The most common element is the 
sense of verisimilitude: Players are looking for an experience that feels the way it 
would truly feel to drive, ﬂ y, or otherwise control a vehicle. Because most of us 
have driven cars, we have an expectation of how that feels. But most of us don’t 
know what it feels like to drive a car at 200 miles per hour or to drive a car that has 
various weapons installed. Most of us have not experienced ﬂ ying a plane our-
selves, but we know what being in a plane feels like.
Simulations vary from realistically representing the way the vehicle handles on the 
road or in the air to adding game mechanics such as combat, racing, special chal-
lenges like skids or slaloms, and so on. Although space and water vehicle simulations 
also exist, they tend to follow the same fundamental features as the ﬂ ying and 
driving simulations. Not only do the same physics generally apply, but the addi-
tional game mechanics and features are often the same.
507
CHAPTER 17


--- PAGE BREAK ---

508 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Game Features
Flight simulators fall into two general categories: civilian and military. Civilian 
ﬂ ight sims don’t include aerial combat; they’re mostly about the way the aircraft 
looks and performs and so are often quite realistic. Military ﬂ ight sims have to be 
simpliﬁ ed for reasons we’ll look at later in this chapter, but they offer exciting 
physical and tactical challenges.
Driving simulators also tend to fall into two categories: organized racing and imagi-
nary racing. Organized racing simulators try to reproduce the experience of driving 
a racing car or motorcycle in an existing racing class, such as IndyCar, NASCAR, or 
Formula 1. To use the ofﬁ cial name and indicia of any of these racing organiza-
tions, you will need to get a license (see the section “Intellectual Property Rights” 
later in this chapter). Imaginary racing games are just that: games about racing in 
imaginary situations, driving madly through cities or the countryside or even fan-
tasy environments.
The players themselves also fall into two categories. The purists demand highly 
accurate simulations of real vehicles with all their quirks and limitations; if a purist 
forgets to retract the airplane’s ﬂ aps after takeoff, he wants those ﬂ aps to be dam-
aged by excessive airspeed and to be stuck in the down position with appropriate 
consequences for the plane’s handling characteristics. On the other hand, casual 
players don’t care about the details as long as they can ﬂ y or drive around, prefera-
bly fast, and maybe even shoot at things.
The Player’s Role
The player’s role in a ﬂ ight simulator seems quite straightforward: It’s that of a 
pilot. In single-seat aircraft, that’s all that is required. However, if you’re going to 
simulate larger aircraft such as bombers or two-seat ﬁ ghters, you’ll have to decide 
how you want to handle the varying roles available. In LucasArts’ excellent World 
War II simulator Their Finest Hour, the player can play any of the waist and tail gun 
positions of the Junkers Ju 88 bomber while leaving the plane on autopilot, or he 
can set the guns to ﬁ re automatically at any target that comes into view. To drop 
the bombs, however, he has to take over the bombardier’s position personally. 
Three-Sixty Paciﬁ c’s game Megafortress required the player to manage no fewer than 
ﬁ ve different stations: pilot, copilot, navigator, electronic warfare specialist, and 
offensive weapons ofﬁ cer. Each station had its own instrument panel and responsi-
bilities, and the player had to move constantly from one to another to check on 
conditions and respond to emergencies. At times when the player was away from 
the pilot’s seat, the plane ﬂ ew on autopilot toward the next waypoint.
In racing-oriented driving games, the player’s role is that of a racing driver most of 
the time, but the more serious simulations, such as IndyCar Racing, also allow the 
player to be a mechanic, modifying the angle of the airfoils, changing tires to com-
pensate for weather conditions, and so on.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

VEHICLE SIMULATIONS 
509
 CHAPTER 17
Competition Modes
A few vehicle simulations aren’t really games because they don’t offer the player a 
goal, apart from learning to control the vehicle. They don’t have any rules other 
than the laws of physics. Most vehicle simulations, however, offer driving or ﬂ ying 
within a competitive context, either a race or a battle of some kind.
The competition modes of military ﬂ ight simulators resemble those of ﬁ rst-
person shooters: single-player modes against artiﬁ cial opponents, multiplayer death 
matches (every player for himself), and team-based play. Civilian ﬂ ight simulators 
usually offer only a single-player mode, although they sometimes also allow races 
and follow-my-lead competitions. Driving simulators are generally single-player 
games or multiplayer races and are seldom team-based.
Both military ﬂ ight simulators and organized race-driving simulators often include 
a career mode; in this mode the player creates a pilot or driver and follows his 
career (trying not to get him killed, of course), racking up victories and collecting 
performance statistics.
These games also include campaign modes. In a driving game’s campaign mode, 
the player, as a race driver, tries to win in a real racing circuit, collecting points 
according to the ofﬁ cial rules of the circuit.
In military ﬂ ight simulators, the campaign mode can work in a variety of ways. In 
one type of campaign mode, the game offers a series of missions, one at a time, in 
which the player must achieve a speciﬁ ed victory condition before going on to the 
next mission; completing all the missions constitutes winning the campaign. In 
another type of campaign mode, the player can play all the missions in order, 
whether she meets the mission objectives or not. However, if she plays through all 
of them without achieving enough mission objectives, she loses the campaign. The 
better she ﬁ ghts on any given occasion, the more chance she has of winning the 
war in the long run, but she can still afford to lose the occasional battle. This more 
closely approximates what happens in a real war, but as the designer, you must pro-
vide clear feedback to the player about how she’s doing as she goes along.
Gameplay and Victory Conditions
The primary challenge in playing any vehicle simulator is in controlling the vehi-
cle: learning to speed it up, slow it down, and steer it without crashing it into 
something. Without being able to feel the G-forces on his body, the player has to 
depend on other cues to determine how fast he is going and how hard he is 
braking.
In the case of ﬂ ight simulators, you can make this challenge simple, requiring the 
player to know almost nothing about aerodynamics, or extremely difﬁ cult, accu-
rately modeling the behavior of an airplane. Unlike a car, airplanes respond rather 
slowly to their controls, often beginning to execute a maneuver a few seconds after 
the player has ﬁ rst moved the yoke or joystick. Players used to driving a car will 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

510
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
tend to overcontrol the plane when they ﬁ nd that it doesn’t respond immediately. 
If you want to present a realistic challenge, you can model this problem accurately; 
to keep the game easy, treat the plane more like a car.
MILITARY FLIGHT SIMS
In military ﬂ ight simulators, the player must not only ﬂ y the aircraft but also 
achieve the mission’s objectives, usually attacking enemy aircraft and ground 
installations. Modern air-to-air combat, conducted with long-range guided missiles 
and often directed by Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) planes, is a 
rather cerebral exercise. Hence the continuing popularity of World War I and II 
ﬂ ight simulators and ﬁ ctional battles such as those in Crimson Skies (see Figure 17.1).
These let the players dogﬁ ght, twisting and turning through the sky, hiding behind 
clouds, diving out of the sun, and blasting away with bullets at short range. It’s a 
much more action-packed experience.
The role of the aircraft being simulated deﬁ nes the gameplay for military ﬂ ight
simulators. Fighter planes are designed primarily to attack enemy aircraft and to 
protect friendly aircraft and ground units from air attacks; attack planes are 
designed to attack moving ground targets; bombers are designed to attack station-
ary ones. Most military ﬂ ight simulators offer a series of missions, often with 
primary and secondary objectives such that achieving either or both of them con-
stitutes victory. Being killed or having the player’s plane shot down constitutes a 
FIGURE 17.1 
A pilot’s view in 
Crimson Skies. Note 
the very simple instru-
ment panel. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

VEHICLE SIMULATIONS 
511
 CHAPTER 17
loss. However, you don’t have to establish binary victory conditions; you can allow 
for partial success by rating the accomplishments of a mission according to the 
number of objectives achieved, the length of time it took, and the amount of dam-
age sustained by the aircraft, for instance. You can also assign bonus points for a 
swift and safe return.
CIVILIAN FLIGHT SIMS
Civilian ﬂ ight simulators such as the excellent Microsoft Flight Simulator (see Figure 
17.2) seldom include any victory conditions unless they implement racing or tests 
of ﬂ ying ability. Many of them simply let the player ﬂ y and try different things 
with the aircraft rather than present him with a speciﬁ c mission to accomplish. 
However, civilian ﬂ ight sims can present a wide variety of challenges: ﬂ ying at 
night; ﬂ ying in rain, fog, or strong winds; and using visual ﬂ ight rules or instru-
ment ﬂ ight rules. Landing smoothly and safely, particularly in adverse weather 
conditions, is always the most dangerous moment in a ﬂ ight and usually represents 
the toughest challenge that a civilian ﬂ ight simulator offers. Most provide an auto-
land function that simply returns the plane to the ground without the player’s 
having to perform the landing.
FIGURE 17.2 
An instrument panel 
in Microsoft Flight 
Simulator 2002. This is 
a game for people who 
take piloting seriously. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

512 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
DRIVING SIMS
Organized racing simulations, like sports games, take their gameplay from the real 
thing. The challenge is primarily to win races without crashing. This may be just as 
complicated as real racing, including such details as refueling, managing the tires, 
and compensating for the weather. Some games also include an economic element: 
The player wins prize money for doing well in a race, and the prize money enables 
her to buy better equipment. This produces positive feedback that must be counter-
acted to balance the game; as the player improves, her artiﬁ cial opponents must 
also improve to offer her a worthy challenge.
In more arcadelike driving games, the games often include other challenges such as 
running other drivers off the road, gathering up collectibles or power-ups, weaving 
through hoops or cones, shooting at enemies or dropping devices to delay them, 
and so on.
Core Mechanics
Designing a vehicle simulation is primarily a matter of research and compromise. 
Unless your game is a just-for-fun simulation such as Super Mario Kart or Beetle 
Adventure Racing!, vehicle simulation is the most technologically oriented of games, 
so the core mechanics of the game are almost entirely about physics. Much of the 
entertainment value of accurate simulation games comes from the feeling of con-
trolling a real machine instead of meeting strategic challenges or taking part in a 
story. To provide that value, you will need to research your vehicles thoroughly. If 
you’re designing a military vehicle, you can probably ﬁ nd much of what you need 
from Jane’s Information Group, publishers of such volumes as Jane’s All the World’s 
Aircraft, and of course, from the vehicle’s manufacturer. For automobiles, the vari-
ous enthusiast magazines offer all the data you could want.
The compromises occur when you start trying to control a simulated vehicle with a 
computer or console machine’s I/O devices, especially a large, complicated vehicle 
such as a B-52 bomber. The kinds of compromises you make and the places they 
take you will depend mostly on whether your target audience is the purist or the 
casual player.
Designing Opponents
The easiest way to design a variety of opponents in a vehicle simulation is simply to 
provide different drivers’ vehicles with different performance characteristics. One 
plane climbs slightly faster than another; one can turn more sharply. The player 
will experience different challenges in dealing with each opponent based on its 
design parameters. However, once the player ﬁ gures it out, the opponent is easily 
beaten. As soon as the player discovers that a Supermarine Spitﬁ re can consistently 
outrun a Messerschmitt Bf 109 in level ﬂ ight, the situation offers an obvious strat-
egy for Spitﬁ re pilots: boom and zoom (hitting and running away).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

VEHICLE SIMULATIONS 
513
 CHAPTER 17
To create further variety, modify the behavior of individual opponent drivers (or 
pilots). Design the AI for these opponents by starting with perfect performance and 
then creating variations from perfection. For example, it’s possible to create a “per-
fect” AI driver in a racing simulation, one that always follows the most efﬁ cient 
line around the track, always shifts gears at precisely the correct moment, and 
knows the ideal speed at which to take each corner without spinning out. If such a 
driver has a better car than the player’s, he will be unbeatable. The trick, then, is to 
modify the AI driver’s judgment so that it isn’t perfect—so that he doesn’t always 
shift at exactly the right time or follow the most efﬁ cient line. This combination of 
factors, both vehicle characteristics and variable driver skill, provides the variety 
among opponents in vehicle simulators.
As you research ﬂ ying or driving, you will discover other tricks to incorporate in 
the AI: drafting behind other cars, for example, and diving out of the sun to sur-
prise the enemy in a dogﬁ ght.
Damage
You need to decide what to do about damage. Comical or arcadelike racing sims 
may not simulate damage at all; if the car hits something, it simply bounces off, 
although doing so usually slows the car down. This allows the driver to be much 
more careless, and it is a good solution for casual and children’s games. They can 
afford to hit a few things and still win the race—at least in the earlier, easier stages 
of the game. Other games model damage as a single variable, like unit health points 
in a war game. When damage reaches a certain level, the vehicle simply stops run-
ning (which, in the case of an airplane, means that it crashes or explodes). If your 
target machine doesn’t have much CPU power (as in a cell phone, for example), 
these approaches mean you don’t have to model the physics very accurately.
To model damage accurately, you should divide the vehicle into separate areas that 
can suffer damage in a collision (or, in a military simulator, from enemy ﬁ re), and 
decide how that damage affects the performance of the vehicle. For instance, a race 
car with minor damage to the airfoils or body can continue, although with a per-
formance penalty, but a blown tire forces it to halt. With airplanes, the consequences
can be dramatically different depending on what part of the aircraft sustains dam-
age. A plane can still ﬂ y without its tail, but it is unstable and extremely difﬁ cult to 
handle. These approaches give great verisimilitude but require sophisticated phys-
ics models to accomplish.
The Game World
The landscape that a simulated vehicle moves through is an important part of the 
game’s entertainment—even if it’s a relatively static landscape as in a racing 
game—because the landscape is connected with the function of the vehicle itself.
The settings of ﬂ ight simulators consist of the plane itself and the ground that it 
ﬂ ies above. With a few exceptions, such as Microsoft Combat Flight Simulator, most 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

514 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
ﬂ ight sims don’t offer interesting terrain. If your ﬂ ight simulator has a historical 
setting, you can do a lot with the ancillary screens to set the mood. Electronic Arts’ 
World War II ﬂ ight simulator, Jane’s WWII Fighters, shows a hangar, a full of period 
aircraft and other gear, and even plays Glenn Miller tunes in the background. 
Unfortunately, in the pursuit of historical accuracy, Electronic Arts sets all its com-
bat missions above the Ardennes Mountains in the wintertime: a bleak, snowy 
landscape covered with leaﬂ ess trees. The technical quality of the graphics is 
superb for its day; it’s too bad they aren’t depicting something more interesting. Its 
competitor Microsoft Combat Flight Simulator is less historically accurate but argu-
ably more fun to ﬂ y because you can buzz the Eiffel Tower or London’s Houses of 
Parliament.
Driving simulators are set on either racetracks or roads except for a few off-road 
simulators that offer the fun of bouncing all over interesting terrain without hav-
ing to steer carefully. Narrow, twisting mountain roads are a popular choice for 
road-based games because they offer both an interesting challenge and pretty 
scenery.
Weather is a critical factor to consider when designing the settings of both ﬂ ight 
and driving simulators. Can the player drive or ﬂ y at night? In rain? In fog? Rain 
plays an important strategic role in automobile racing because each driver needs to 
make a pit stop to switch to rain tires, which hold the road better. The pit stop takes 
time, but drivers who don’t take the time run an increased risk of crashing.
Because ﬂ ight and driving simulators rarely show other people, their worlds can 
seem eerily devoid of life. Cities are depicted as collections of buildings with no 
pedestrians (and in ﬂ ight simulators, no vehicles). Each airport has only one plane, 
the player’s, and no ground staff. Simulator designers often feel that, because these 
things aren’t critical to the gameplay, it is a waste of time to implement them. Still, 
they add considerably to the player’s immersion. A World War II airﬁ eld should 
have other planes, pilots, and ground staff moving around; a track-based racing
 sim should certainly have a crowd in the grandstand.
Other Vehicles
Flight and driving simulators are by far the most popular kinds, but there are other 
sorts of vehicle simulators as well, usually for niche markets. The last few years 
have seen the arrival of large numbers of new vehicles from the hang glider in Far 
Cry to the magic broomsticks in the Harry Potter games. This section addresses a few 
of the more common types.
Boats and Ships
Most boat simulations are of powerboats or jet skis, offering the same kinds of 
speed thrills that driving simulators do (see Figure 17.3). The handling 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

VEHICLE SIMULATIONS 
515
 CHAPTER 17
characteristics of powerboats differ from those of cars. Because boats move in a 
ﬂ uid medium, they don’t have traction the way a car does, so they can’t turn as 
sharply as a car can. Powerboat simulations usually offer racing over a twisting 
course marked off by buoys. Jet ski or fantasy water vehicle simulations often have 
outrageous jumps and other challenges as well.
There have been a few simulators of warships over the years, often fairly small craft 
with high speed and maneuverability, such as the PT boat of World War II fame. 
Larger vessels such as battleships and aircraft carriers move more slowly and delib-
erately and, therefore, tend to be simulated not as individual vehicles but as part of 
naval warfare simulations involving whole ﬂ eets, such as Harpoon or Dangerous Waters.
Submarine simulations such as Silent Hunter III are fairly popular because of the spe-
cialized nature of their situation and because they can move in three dimensions. 
They normally concentrate on rather old-fashioned submarine activities, such as 
looking through the periscope and ﬁ ring torpedoes at surface ships. We associate 
these sorts of things with submarines from watching old war movies, and of course, 
they’re the most visually dramatic. Relatively few games simulate the modern role 
of submarines, hunting and hiding from one another in total darkness, because it’s 
too cerebral an activity.
FIGURE 17.3 
Jetboat Superchamps
in a third-person view. 
Note the map overlay. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

516
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Sailing simulations are comparatively rare, but they do exist; see Virtual Skipper 4
on the left of Figure 17.4. Although sailing a boat is a complex and interesting 
challenge, such games appeal only to a specialized market. Most people prefer sim-
ulations in which you can point the vehicle in the direction you want to go and 
push the gas pedal to get you there.
FIGURE 17.4 Virtual Skipper 4 and Sea Dogs II
Few ship simulations model the ocean in all its complexity, with shoals and cur-
rents, tides and storms. Rather, they tend to treat the water the way driving 
simulations treat the ground: simply as an area over which ships move. Pirate 
games such as Sea Dogs II (Figure 17.4, right side) and Sid Meier’s Pirates! are usually 
arcade or role-playing games rather than sailing simulations.
Tanks and Mechs
Tank simulations seldom implement the complexity of tank battles as they really 
happened in World War II, the Arab-Israeli wars, or the Gulf War. Real tanks have a 
top speed of about 50 MPH, have limited visibility, and carry only a few types of 
weapons, so they don’t appeal much to the casual gamer. Like military ﬂ ight simu-
lators, tank simulators are typically about a lone tank operating against other tanks 
and a variety of other enemies.
From a gameplay standpoint, the most interesting characteristic of a tank is its 
rotating turret, which enables it to shoot in directions other than the one in which 
it is facing. (Notice the example in Figure 17.5.) It can be difﬁ cult to design a good 
user interface for this. You will need to provide a mechanism for rotating the turret 
that is separate from the mechanism that steers the tank and a separate view win-
dow for aiming and ﬁ ring the gun. Real tanks have a commander and a gun crew 
as well as a driver, but as with bombers and other multiseat aircraft, you will have 
to ﬁ nd a way to let a single player control everything.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

VEHICLE SIMULATIONS 
517
 CHAPTER 17
A popular alternative is the mech, which is a science-ﬁ ction cousin to the tank that 
is usually depicted as a large armed and armored walking machine (see Figure 17.6).
Because mechs aren’t restricted by reality, they can carry all sorts of imaginary 
weapons and hardware, and they can be optimized for single-player play.
FIGURE 17.5 
A tank in Panzer Elite.
The turret is facing in a 
different direction from 
the tracks. 
FIGURE 17.6 
MechWarrior 4: 
Mercenaries


--- PAGE BREAK ---

518 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Spacecraft
There are almost no simulations of real spacecraft—except for quasi-educational 
ones about the space shuttles—because real spacecraft respond far too slowly and 
move too deliberately to make for an interesting game. The majority of spacecraft 
simulations, therefore, are science ﬁ ction, and they typically consist of either 
ﬁ ghter planes in space, such as the Wing Commander series, or capital ship (large 
warship) simulations, such as the many Star Trek games. The ﬁ ghter types are sim-
ple action games with only a few variables to manage: fuel, ammunition, damage, 
shields, and rarely anything else. Capital ship simulations are more strategic, giving 
the player control of a wide range of weapons and other equipment.
Intellectual Property Rights
As a general rule, you can depict and simulate military equipment without obtain-
ing permission from their manufacturers. Because such machines are not sold
to the general public or generally exploited in the marketplace in any other way, 
you may safely use their images in your games without worrying about who owns 
the rights.
Automobiles are another story, however. If you are going to simulate an existing car 
and use its real name and logo, you must have a license from the manufacturer. 
The manufacturer might not be willing to let you show the car crumpled and burn-
ing by the side of the road either. This accounts for the large number of vehicle 
simulations in which the cars can ﬂ ip over in an accident but never get damaged—
they ﬂ ip back upright a second or two later, as in Beetle Adventure Racing! Or, you 
can do as Interstate ’76 did and use cars that look rather like existing vehicles and 
have similar names but don’t actually show the manufacturer’s indicia.
The Presentation Layer
The presentation layer of a vehicle simulator is chieﬂ y concerned with creating the 
visual and auditory appearance of being in the vehicle itself, so management activi-
ties are kept to a minimum. When there are different gameplay modes at all, they 
usually offer the player a new perspective rather than a different set of challenges. 
The major exception is serious racing games, which generally provide a variety of 
camera angles while driving, but also a number of customization and tuning 
modes for modifying the car in the workshop.
Interaction Model
The interaction model in a vehicle simulator is quite straightforward: The player’s 
vehicle is his avatar. The machine’s controls are mapped onto the computer’s input 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

VEHICLE SIMULATIONS 
519
 CHAPTER 17
devices, and the player’s view is normally that of the pilot or driver, forward 
through the cockpit windows.
Camera Model
The camera model in most vehicle simulations doesn’t try to be intelligent; it just 
offers a variety of ﬁ xed perspectives from different angles. Although the game can-
not be played from all of these angles, the unplayable angles can be used for taking 
dramatic screenshots or for viewing instant replays of the action.
VIEWS COMMON TO DRIVING AND FLIGHT SIMULATORS
Both driving and ﬂ ight simulators implement certain standard views:
■ Pilot’s/driver’s view. This is the normal view that most simulators offer by 
default. The player sees what the pilot would see from the cockpit or what the 
driver would see from the driver’s seat. The vehicle’s instruments take up the lower 
half of the screen, and the upper half shows the view out of the windshield, often 
partially obscured by parts of the hood or the nose of the plane. Most sims offer 
separate look-left, look-right, and look-backward views, as well as a mode in which 
the player can swivel the view smoothly in all directions to see what’s overhead 
and down to see instruments located below the pilot’s normal line of sight.
■ Cockpit-removed view. This unrealistic but dramatic viewpoint uses the full 
screen to show the pilot or driver’s view out of the front of the vehicle, unobscured 
by the cockpit controls. Semitransparent overlays in the corners of the screen allow 
the player to see instrument readings without much interference with the view. 
Even these overlays can be removed, providing an unobscured view of the world 
outside with no visible indication that the player is in a vehicle at all.
■ Chase view. This is an exterior view of the player’s vehicle, as if from another 
one following closely behind and mimicking its movements. In ﬂ ight simulators, 
the plane always seems to be level when in chase view and the world turns around 
it. For example, if the player banks her plane, the horizon tilts while the player’s 
plane appears to be level in the middle of the screen. In driving simulators, the 
point of view when in chase mode/view is usually somewhat elevated so the play-
er’s car does not obscure the view of the road in front.
■ Rear, side, and front views. These are exterior views of the player’s vehicle 
from all four sides. If the player’s plane banks, the view does not bank; the ground 
remains below.
■ Free-roaming camera. Generally used only in an instant-replay mode, this 
enables the camera to be moved anywhere in the world and tilted or rotated to look 
in any direction. This view is useful for players trying to analyze exactly what hap-
pened in a particular encounter.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

520 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
VIEWS UNIQUE TO MILITARY FLIGHT SIMULATORS
The following views are found only in ﬂ ight simulators—and military ones, at that:
■ Ground target view. This is a view of the target on the ground that is currently 
selected for attack. The camera is positioned at a nearby ground location, facing the 
target, and does not move. This view lets the player watch incoming missiles or 
bombs arrive to see whether they accurately hit the target.
■ Bomb or missile view. This is the point of view from a recently released bomb 
or missile, as if it had a camera in its nose (as many modern weapons do). This 
allows a particularly dramatic perspective as the weapon approaches its target. This 
view disappears after the weapon detonates, and the perspective returns to the 
default view.
VIEWS UNIQUE TO DRIVING SIMULATORS
The following views occur only in driving simulators. Obviously, the cars are not 
drivable from these perspectives, but they are great for instant replays.
■ Track-side view. Many real racetracks locate cameras at ﬁ xed points around the 
track, and a good many games emulate this. The game’s point of view can be either 
locked to a speciﬁ c location or made to track the player’s car as it moves past. It’s 
also common to have a routine that automatically makes the display switch from 
one track-side camera to another to follow the leaders as they go around. This gives 
a good simulation of watching televised coverage of a race (see Figure 17.7).
■ Grandstand view. This is the traditional spectator’s view of the ﬁ nish line.
■ Blimp view. This is a high aerial view looking straight down onto the racetrack 
or course, letting you see all the cars at once.
FIGURE 17.7 
A typical track-side 
view in GT Legends


--- PAGE BREAK ---

VEHICLE SIMULATIONS 
521
 CHAPTER 17
User Interface Design
The biggest challenge in designing the user interface of a vehicle simulator is in 
mapping the vehicle’s real controls to those available on the target machine. For 
serious simulations, analog controls are essential; the binary D-pads of older hand-
held controllers don’t allow the kind of precision the player needs to steer accurately. 
At one time, console machines simply couldn’t support serious simulations, but 
now that most console machines offer analog joysticks, mapping the controls of a 
race car to those of a home console machine presents less of a problem.
Vehicle simulations beneﬁ t from motion-sensing controllers almost as much as 
sports games do. Use their tilt sensors to serve as a steering wheel, and their but-
tons for acceleration and braking. Don’t require the player to turn them by more 
than about 90 degrees in either direction from the central, neutral position, 
though. As drivers we can turn a real steering wheel hand-over-hand because it’s 
circular and ﬁ xed in place by the steering column, but the iPhone and Wii control-
lers are rectangular and not attached to anything. It would be awkward for the 
player to reposition his hands on them during play. 
DON’T RELY ON EXTRA-COST CONTROLLERS
Force-feedback joysticks, throttles, control yokes, steering wheels, and pedals (rudder 
for planes, and gas and brake for cars) all help immensely, and serious players will have 
them. You can greatly improve the quality of the simulation experience for such players 
by supporting them. However, don’t design—and, more important, don’t tune—your 
game with a presumption that your players will have this kind of hardware. Your game 
should be an enjoyable experience even with only a standard console controller or a mouse
and keyboard. If it’s not, you’ve severely limited your audience, and reviewers are bound 
to slam it. You may ignore this advice if you ship the special controller with the game, as 
Guitar Hero does, but such an approach will raise the price of your game substantially.
SIMPLIFICATIONS
Military ﬂ ight simulators always require some simpliﬁ cation from the real thing; 
you will have to decide how much. Real military pilots require months or years of 
training, much of it spent sitting in classrooms. Because you want your players to 
be able to ﬂ y the planes within a few minutes of installing the software, you have 
to make considerable compromises in the realism of the games. You will almost cer-
tainly want to reduce the number of instruments in the cockpit and the number of 
functions that some of them perform.
Flight simulators commonly simplify navigation as well. Modern planes have 
global positioning systems, but World War I and II pilots still needed celestial navi-
gation skills; they plotted their courses by the stars at night and by landmarks or 
dead reckoning during the daytime. Because this isn’t the most exciting thing 
about ﬂ ying, it’s acceptable to just give the player a map.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

522
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
AN EXTREME CASE
The takeoff sequence in the game Megafortress was possibly the longest for any
consumer-level ﬂ ight simulator ever made. The game simulated a hypothetical stealth-
modiﬁ ed B-52 bomber. To get the plane off the ground (fortunately, it was already lined 
up on the runway), you had to:
1. Switch on battery power.
2. Switch on interior lights.
3. Switch on power to all eight engines.
4. Fire starter cartridges for all eight engines.
5. Switch off battery power after the engines were running.
6. Switch on navigation lights.
7. Switch on landing lights.
8. Pressurize the plane to noncombat levels.
9. Tune radio to correct frequency (this also served as the game’s copy protection).
10. Lower ﬂ aps.
11. Release brakes.
12. Throttle up all eight engines (fortunately, this could be done simultaneously).
13. Pull back on stick (plane takes off).
14. Raise landing gear.
15. Raise ﬂ aps.
This sequence involved moving back and forth from the pilot’s seat to the copilot’s seat a 
couple of times, too. Soon after you got into the air, you had to switch all the lights back 
off to avoid being detected by enemy aircraft. If you forgot to pressurize the plane, the 
crew complained about being cold. When you went into combat, you were supposed to 
lower the air pressure to avoid a violent decompression if the plane was hit.
Megafortress was a techno-geek’s dream. It was not, however, a big ﬁ nancial success as 
ﬂ ight simulators go.
COORDINATED FLIGHT
Another common simpliﬁ cation that almost all ﬂ ight simulators make is to produce 
automatically coordinated ﬂ ight. Ordinarily, the pilot of an airplane must coordinate 
the movements of the ailerons and rudder when he turns to prevent the plane from 
skidding sideways in the air, in the same way that a car skids sideways on wet pave-
ment if it takes a turn too fast. Because the plane has no tires gripping pavement to 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

VEHICLE SIMULATIONS 
523
 CHAPTER 17
control the direction it is facing, this can happen even more easily in the air. 
However, most players have only one control mechanism, the joystick. To simplify 
ﬂ ight, the left-right motion of the joystick controls both the rudder and the aile-
rons simultaneously, producing automatically coordinated ﬂ ight.
CREATING THE SENSE OF SPEED
In a ﬂ ight simulation, simply going fast is rarely the point. Most players either try 
to ﬂ y accurately and aerobatically or are engaging in aerial combat. Although speed 
is an important factor in the game, conveying that sense to the player isn’t critical 
to the experience.
In driving simulations, however, the sense of speed is all-important. Here are some 
ways to create it:
■ Give the player a speedometer. This is the most obvious way to inform a 
player of his speed, but it creates a purely logical awareness, not a visceral one. It 
might also help to give him a tachometer so he can see that the engine is near its 
maximum potential.
■ Vary the driving surface. Don’t present a smooth ribbon of black, but make 
the road a series of continuously changing dark grays. (Look back at Figure 17.7,
GT Legends, to see this done well.) The rate at which these color gradations move 
toward the car helps create the feeling of speed. Don’t just use a set of random dots, 
though, or at high speed the player will just see a static, ﬂ ickering surface. It’s bet-
ter to implement these cues as a series of narrow strips parallel to the road’s edges. 
Also, on roads (as opposed to racetracks), be sure to implement the dotted white 
line down the center. The sight of the lines ﬂ icking by provides a continuous visual 
cue to the speed, as well as a good way to tell when the vehicle is speeding up or 
slowing down. (In a ﬂ ight simulator, the equivalent is to be sure the ground is as 
detailed as possible.)
■ Include roadside objects. A continuous fence, guardrail, or strip of grass 
doesn’t do much to give the player a feeling of motion. Make sure there are lots of 
trees, road signs, and bridges. Anything that rises vertically beside the road or that 
passes over or under the car helps create the impression of motion.
■ Use sounds. The sound of the engine is the most obvious auditory cue, but you 
can also include road noise (the sound the tires make on the pavement), wind 
noise, and tires squealing as the vehicle rounds corners. Another excellent cue is a 
Doppler shift as the car passes, or is passed by, some noise-making object.
G-FORCES
The driver of any vehicle feels a variety of forces affecting her body: acceleration, 
deceleration, and centrifugal force. The forces give a lot of valuable feedback about 
the behavior of the vehicle. Unfortunately, in a home-based simulator, you can’t 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

