526
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
4. What are the competition modes and victory conditions in the game? If this is a 
military vehicle, what sorts of missions are available for it? If it is a civilian one, 
what kinds of things can it do besides simply racing (if anything)?
5. What settings are available for the vehicle to travel through? Even a ﬂ ight simu-
lator needs ground to look at below.
6. What camera views are appropriate for this vehicle? If it is a military vehicle, are 
there special camera views that assist in ﬁ ghting? Can the player record and even 
edit instant replays so as to relive and show off his triumphs?
7. How will you map the many controls of a plane or even a car onto the input 
devices available to the player? What aspects of the vehicle’s controls will need to 
be simpliﬁ ed? Which can afford to have simple on-off buttons and which require 
analog controls?
8. If a vehicle is capable of steering in a direction different from that in which it 
shoots, how can the player control both at once conveniently?
9. What navigational facilities is the player going to need in order to know where 
he is (radar screen, overlay map, separate map mode that pauses the game, and so 
on)?
10. What artiﬁ cial intelligence is needed to create suitable opponents in the game’s 
competitive modes? What sorts of things will the artiﬁ cial opponents need to man-
age? Will they be smart enough to take advantage of superior speed, acceleration, 
cornering ability, braking ability?
11. Do you want to create a sense of speed for the player? If so, how will you create 
it? (Remember, you can use both visual and audible cues.) 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 CHAPTER 18
Construction and 
Management Simulations
Construction and management simulations (CMS) offer players the chance to build 
things, such as anthills or cities, while operating within economic constraints. In 
this chapter you’ll learn about the gameplay of construction and management, and 
consider the unique actions and challenges these games provide. You’ll also study 
user interfaces in these kinds of games. As an example, we will spend time discuss-
ing SimCity, which was the ﬁ rst successful CMS.
Although they do not involve construction, we’ll also look at pure business simula-
tions, games that focus on managing economic processes. The section on hybrid 
games examines titles such as Age of Empires; hybrid games blend certain qualities 
of CMSs and war games. Although Chapter 14, “Strategy Games,” addresses war 
games, some hybrid games include interesting economic elements as well; we’ll 
refer to them throughout this chapter where appropriate.
What Are Construction and Management 
Simulations?
Construction and management simulations (CMSs) are games about processes. The 
player’s goal is not to defeat an enemy but to build something within the context 
of an ongoing process. The better the player understands and controls the process, 
the more success she has at building. CMSs typically include both a free-form con-
struction mode, in which the player can build things any way she likes, and 
prebuilt scenarios for her to manage.
CONSTRUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SIMULATIONS A construction and management 
simulation is a game in which the majority of challenges are economic and concern 
growth. Construction activity is an essential element of any CMS. Pattern recognition 
and exploration challenges may also be present. CMSs avoid physical coordination and 
conﬂ ict challenges, unless they are hybrids with another genre.
527
CHAPTER 18


--- PAGE BREAK ---

528
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
The ﬁ rst really successful computerized construction and management simulation 
was SimCity, which proved that computer games don’t need high-speed action or 
violence to succeed. SimCity succeeds in part because it does not have these proper-
ties and, therefore, appeals to a broad audience. We’ll examine SimCity in some 
detail later in the chapter.
Game Features
CMSs let the player construct and manage some organized system that he can build 
up from constituent parts—a city, a building, an anthill, or whatever the game per-
mits him to design. Most CMSs offer two sets of tools: one set for building and one 
set for managing. Building is generally considered easy, but managing can be tricky 
indeed.
The Player’s Role
When designing any game, the ﬁ rst question you have to ask yourself is: What is 
the player going to do? The answer to this question usually takes the form of a clear 
statement of the player’s role in the game: pilot, adventurer, irradiated hedgehog, 
and so on. In a CMS, however, it’s not as easy to deﬁ ne the player’s role because 
that role seldom corresponds to an actual activity in real life. The mayor of a city 
doesn’t really lay out its streets or make zoning decisions personally.
A CMS appeals to the player because he gets to make something of his own. 
Working carefully, tending and tweaking, he can build a tiny settlement on the 
banks of the Tiber and turn it into the glorious city that was Rome. Not the origi-
nal Rome or the game designer’s Rome but the player’s Rome—Rome as it would 
have been if the player had been in command. The desire to create is in the heart 
of all CMS players. To design a good construction and management simulation, 
understand that desire.
Progression
Unlike most other genres, CMSs usually don’t include progression from level to 
level or a story of any kind. They may offer a set of scenarios for the player to play 
in, with varying degrees of difﬁ culty, but one scenario doesn’t necessarily have any 
relationship to the previous or next one.
Because many CMSs don’t impose a victory condition, there’s little sense of prog-
ress toward an end. In fact, many CMSs don’t necessarily end at all. As long as the 
player avoids the loss condition (typically bankruptcy), the game can go on forever.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONSTRUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SIMULATIONS 
529
 CHAPTER 18
SIMCITY, THE MOST FAMOUS CMS OF ALL
Although it isn’t the oldest CMS, SimCity has inspired every CMS that has come after it. 
Published by Maxis (now a part of Electronic Arts) originally for the Commodore 64, 
SimCity achieved its greatest success on the IBM PC, and players can now try the ﬁ rst 
version of the game free on the web. (Visit http://simcity.ea.com/play/simcity_classic.php 
if you’re interested. Note that the web version does not include all the features of the 
original game.) A host of other games in the same mold followed—SimAnt, SimTower, 
SimFarm, and so on—which met with varying degrees of success.
The object of SimCity is to build a city and attract people (called sims) to live and work 
there. The basic economic unit is money, which the player can spend in various ways to 
improve the city. The player’s primary task is to zone tracts of land into one of three 
types: residential, commercial, or industrial. As people move into the city, their occupa-
tion of these areas begins to produce tax revenue, thereby replenishing the city’s coffers. 
This produces a straightforward positive feedback loop: Zoning costs money, but occu-
pied zones produce more money, thereby enabling the player to do more zoning.
The positive feedback is kept in check by other demands on the city’s purse. Sims will not 
move into a region simply because it has been zoned; it needs other amenities as well. 
Foremost among these is electricity, so the player has to buy power plants and electrical 
lines to provide it. The sims also need a way to travel from the residential zones to the 
industrial zones to work and to the commercial zones to shop. This requires road and rail 
networks, which also cost money. If the roads are inadequate to meet the trafﬁ c or if the 
sims have to travel too far to work, they will begin to move out of the city, resulting in a 
loss of tax revenue. Finally, when the city reaches certain population thresholds, the sims 
begin to demand expensive amenities: a sports stadium, an airport, and so on. Again, if 
the player doesn’t provide these, the sims begin to leave.
In addition to the electricity, roads, and civic amenities, the player pays for other com-
mon services, such as ﬁ re protection and police. Fires break out from time to time; left 
unchecked, they destroy the buildings and leave the land unzoned. To combat this, the 
player must build and maintain ﬁ re stations. Crime takes place in industrial areas, 
depressing property values and reducing tax revenues. Building police stations, at yet 
more cost, suppresses crime. Industrial areas and roads also cause air pollution, which 
further depresses the value of nearby residential property. The player cannot reduce air 
pollution; he simply has to keep industrial and residential areas separate.
The game’s algorithm mathematically determines the value of each area. A zoned area 
with parks or a river nearby will be worth more than a similar area that lacks these ben-
eﬁ ts. The more valuable a zone is, the more sims move in and the more tax revenues the 
zone produces. The player can build parks and situate residential zones near woods and 
rivers to increase their attractiveness.
continues on next page


--- PAGE BREAK ---

530 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
SIMCITY, THE MOST FAMOUS CMS OF ALL
continued
The original SimCity, though now an old game, serves as an excellent model to study (see 
Figure 18.1). Because it was designed for low-performance machines, it couldn’t be too 
complex, so its internal economy is easy to understand.
FIGURE 18.1 The original SimCity
Gameplay
The challenges in a CMS are largely economic. The player must understand how 
the internal economy of the game works and how to manipulate it to produce eco-
nomic growth. Growth provides the resources required for the construction that is 
usually the overall goal of the game. The game’s actions consist of activities that 
stimulate growth and ways of using the resources that the player earns.
INDIRECT CONTROL
The majority of CMSs are games of indirect control. The game simulates a process 
that the player can alter only in limited ways, and the player learns by trial and 
error how the changes that he makes affect the functioning of the process. The 
game may offer simulated people (see the section “Simulating Individuals” later in 
this chapter), but they are usually autonomous. Their behavior model governs what 
they do, and while they respond to stimuli, the player can’t give them direct orders.
In contrast, a war game is a game of direct control. The player tells his troops 
exactly where to go and what to do, and the troops do it. The simulated soldiers 
demonstrate little or no autonomous behavior. If the player tells them to stand and 
wait someplace, they wait there forever.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONSTRUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SIMULATIONS 
531
 CHAPTER 18
However, the dividing line between direct and indirect control is a fuzzy one. 
Certain player activities, such as choosing where to build something, constitute 
direct control of the game. Others, such as trying to boost sales by reducing prices, 
are classed as indirect control. Reducing prices is a direct action with respect to the 
prices themselves, but not with respect to sales; the (hoped for) consequent rise in 
sales is the result of the player’s indirect control of the game.
CONSTRUCTION
In most CMSs, construction itself is not challenging: The player clicks the mouse 
on a location, and something appears there. The challenge is in obtaining the 
resources needed for the construction. Construction lets the player exercise her 
imagination and create something unique and personal. Accordingly, you, as the 
designer, need to ﬁ nd a way to make the user interface for construction easy and 
enjoyable to use.
Construction mechanisms in CMSs tend to be of two types: purchase-and-place or 
plan-and-build. Games in which construction is the primary activity tend to use the 
purchase-and-place mechanism; games in which the player alternates between con-
struction and management modes are more likely to use the plan-and-build 
mechanism.
In the purchase-and-place construction mechanism, when the player buys an 
object (a segment of wall, say), the game deducts the resources to build that object 
from stockpiles, and the object immediately appears in a designated location. This 
lets the player build rapidly, adding pieces like using LEGO blocks. You should use 
this mechanism if construction is the primary activity in your game. The activity 
needs to be easy and continuous, not something the player has to wait for. This is 
how SimCity works: Zoning property and constructing civic amenities such as 
police stations and airports happens instantly because zoning and constructing
are the primary activities in the game.
The plan-and-build mechanism is more often seen in games in which the player 
does a little construction, then some management, then more construction, and so 
on. In plan-and-build, the player marks out an area in which new construction will 
appear. The game sometimes displays the new building in a ghostly, semitranspar-
ent form to indicate that it is under construction. However, construction takes 
time. If the game includes simulated people, you might be able to see them at work 
on the building; if those people stop work, the building might be left in a partially 
completed state. You will ﬁ nd plan-and-build in strategy-CMS hybrids where the 
player may be under threat of invasion and time is of the essence.
In plan-and-build, you don’t have to remove all the required resources from storage 
at once because the construction takes place over time. In the Settlers series, wood 
and stone have to be transported a little at a time from stockpiles to the construc-
tion site. This puts an extra burden on the player to manage his resource ﬂ ow but 
also gives him more control. In contrast, the Age of Empires series uses 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

532 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
plan-and-build but deducts the resources necessary for construction immediately 
when it is planned. Resources drain out of the game instead of being transported to 
the site. Although this is unrealistic, it means that the player can build something 
only after he deﬁ nitely has enough resources for it, and he doesn’t have to worry 
about moving resources from point to point.
Dungeon Keeper, another hybrid, makes a particularly interesting example because 
construction is actually excavation; it takes place underground, and the player 
can’t see the area he is digging into. Excavations often encounter immovable
rock or lead to previously unknown caves, underground rivers, or pools of lava. 
Excavation is also irreversible; the game offers no way to close an excavated area. 
This encourages players to be cautious. Suddenly digging an opening into an area 
full of enemy creatures is a major hazard of the game.
FUNCTIONAL CONSTRUCTION CHALLENGES
Construction and demolition is easy in most games: point, click, and it happens, so long 
as the resources required are available. If you want to make the process more of a chal-
lenge, you can impose constraints on how things may be constructed and test to see 
whether the construction meets some required standard. The game Bridge It, for 
instance, requires its player to use certain predeﬁ ned bridge elements—towers, beams, 
cables, and a roadway—to construct a bridge across a body of water. It also requires that 
the bridge actually support a load moving across it (see Figure 18.2). See the section 
“Constrained Creative Play” in Chapter 5, “Creative and Expressive Play,” for more infor-
mation about construction challenges. 
FIGURE 18.2 Bridge It challenges the player to build a functional bridge. 
This one was a failure. (Image courtesy Chronic Logic and Auran.)


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONSTRUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SIMULATIONS 
533
 CHAPTER 18
DEMOLITION
In addition to letting your players construct things, you might need to give them a 
way to demolish things. A big part of the fun the player gets from a CMS is building 
the city, theme park, or other entity the way she wants to build it. If construction 
decisions are irreversible, then the player cannot change her mind or react to new 
circumstances. This might be OK for strategy games (many war games, for example, 
allow you to build factories and defenses but not to demolish them), but in CMSs, 
forbidding demolition prevents the player from exercising her full creative freedom.
You should consider whether you want demolition to cost something, cost nothing, 
or actually earn money. If it costs money to demolish something, you are, in effect, 
penalizing the player for changing her mind and perhaps encouraging her to plan 
more carefully in the future. She loses not only her initial construction cost for the 
item but the demolition costs as well. If demolition costs nothing, the player loses 
only her construction costs. If she actually gets something back, it’s usually called 
selling the item or structure rather than demolishing it, an arrangement that further 
reduces the price the player pays for changing her mind. If she can sell a structure 
back for exactly as much as she paid, there is no net cost at all for building a thing 
and destroying it later. CMSs rarely work this way because to do so removes some 
of the challenge of managing their resources. Players can build madly, secure in the 
knowledge that they can always get their money back by selling.
Victory and Loss Conditions
A good many CMSs do not provide any victory condition; the player simply builds 
whatever she likes as effectively as she can within the constraints of the system. 
These games might well provide a loss condition, however. For example, total 
depletion of resources (or, in monetary terms, bankruptcy) is the loss condition in 
Monopoly. Victory in Monopoly consists simply of bankrupting all the other players; 
that is, forcing all the other players to meet the loss condition so that the last one 
left is declared the victor.
If you do want to deﬁ ne a victory condition, it’s best to do it in the context of a pre-
deﬁ ned scenario that you have created for the player rather than a free-form 
construction mode. Give the player a partially constructed city (or whatever) and a 
set of initial conditions, and then deﬁ ne the victory condition as achieving some 
other condition. It could be as simple as “To win, your enterprise must be worth $5 
billion,” or it can be as complex as you like. You can also start the player in rapidly 
deteriorating conditions and challenge her to turn them around or simply to sur-
vive for a certain length of time.
Competition Modes
CMSs are almost always single-player games. It’s possible to make them into multi-
player competitions, but competition discourages the kind of creative experimentation 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

534 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
that CMSs are designed to support. If the players are sharing a game world and 
competing for the same resources, such as land or minerals hidden in the environ-
ment, the game becomes a race to see who can grab the most, ignoring the other 
aspects of play. If the players are operating in separated game worlds and have sym-
metric starting and victory conditions, the game tends to be about optimizing 
efﬁ ciency. If the conditions are asymmetric, the game will be difﬁ cult to balance.
CMSs let the player be playful, to build and experiment in the world you’ve given 
him. That’s seldom consistent with competition. One major exception is in hybrid 
games, those that have a military element as well as construction and management 
elements. The section “Hybrid Games” later in this chapter discusses these.
Simulating Individuals
Many CMSs simulate the behavior of a group of people (or ants in the case of 
SimAnt) within an environment managed by the player. Games such as the original 
SimCity, which handle a large number of people, model behavior statistically rather 
than keeping separate values for each person. However, you might want to simulate 
the actions of particular individuals that the player can see moving around, as the 
modern versions of SimCity do. This will make your game a good deal more enter-
taining because the player can take an interest in the actions and progress of 
speciﬁ c people. It appeals to a voyeuristic impulse and makes the consequences
of the player’s decisions seem more personal. It’s particularly effective when the 
player can actually see unhappy people packing up and leaving.
Modeling individuals rather than statistical aggregates adds considerably to your 
design job. You will need to create a behavioral model and determine what aspects 
of the individual’s condition the player will be trying to optimize. For example, 
many such games include a single-valued variable that tracks a character’s degree of 
happiness or unhappiness and a set of needs that the simulated character desires to 
fulﬁ ll. Fulﬁ llment may come as the result of the character’s autonomous action 
(driving from home to work fulﬁ lls the need to get to work) or from action taken 
by the player (building a school fulﬁ lls the characters’ need for educational oppor-
tunity). If a need goes unfulﬁ lled, either through a problem that arises within the 
simulation (trafﬁ c jams prevent the person from getting to work) or because the 
player fails to act (no school has been built), there should be a negative conse-
quence of some kind (the simulated person becomes unhappy).
Modeling individuals relieves you of the job of creating a statistical model because 
the behavior of the individuals collectively provides the statistics, but balancing 
such a game is a more intricate task. You will probably discover emergent behav-
iors; that is, unanticipated consequences of design decisions. Some of these will be 
fascinating and almost seem like intelligence, but others will clearly be degenerate: 
simulated people locked in a tight behavioral loop, for example, only ever doing 
one or two things because your needs mechanism isn’t balanced properly.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONSTRUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SIMULATIONS 
535
 CHAPTER 18
Behavioral modeling is too big a subject for us to address comprehensively here. 
Consult the references for further reading.
Mind Reading
If your game allows the player to select a simulated character—usually done by 
clicking the character with the mouse—you can offer another useful analytical 
tool: mind reading. To let the player know what’s on that individual’s mind, pop up 
an icon or even a whole dialog box showing the character’s internal state: current 
goal, degree of happiness, or whatever data might be useful to the player. This lets 
the player get a quick, rough sense of how the people feel without having to turn to 
a chart or a graph.
Advisors
Another tool commonly found in CMSs is the advisor: a game character who pops 
up from time to time and gives the player advice (see Figure 18.3). Because prob-
lems are often local to one area of the map, the player might be looking at another 
area when trouble occurs and not see it until it grows severe. By creating an advi-
sor, you can warn the player of problem conditions wherever they occur. You might 
also consider including a screen button or menu item that moves the camera to the 
location of the most recently reported problem.
FIGURE 18.3 
Theme Park World.
Note the advisor in the 
lower right corner. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

536 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
In addition to warning of emergencies, an advisor can give the player information 
about the general state of the game: “The people need more food,” or “Prices are 
too high.” This lets the player know of global problems without requiring her to 
consult the analytical tools.
To design an advisor, deﬁ ne both the local and the global problems that you think 
are important to let the player know about and then set the threshold levels at 
which the advisor will pop up. If the advisor will interrupt the player or say some-
thing aloud, don’t set these thresholds too low, or the constant interruptions will 
become irritating. You should also make it possible for the player to turn off the 
advisor or to consult it only when he wants to. Playing without the advisor adds an 
extra challenge to the game.
Pure Business Simulations
Pure business simulations allow players to construct only ﬁ nancial fortunes, not 
visible worlds. A game like Theme Park World is a business simulation because it’s 
about attracting customers and making proﬁ ts, but because the player builds struc-
tures that exist in the virtual world, it is not a pure business simulation. Compare 
that with the game Hollywood Mogul, for example, which is a pure business simula-
tion about the business of making movies. It consists only of a series of menu 
screens about hiring stars and making deals. The player never sees a set or a cam-
era. Mr . Bigshot, shown in Figure 18.4, is a fairly simple stock-market simulation 
and is even more abstract than Hollywood Mogul.
Most of the challenges of designing a pure business simulation are the same as for 
any other management simulation: You must devise an economy and mechanisms 
for manipulating it. The real trick is to ﬁ nd some way of making the subject visu-
ally interesting. Spreadsheets and pie charts have limited appeal, so if you’re going 
to do a management simulation without a construction element, try to give it some 
kind of a setting or ﬁ nd a visual representation of the process that will make it 
attractive and compelling. Mr. Bigshot accomplishes this with lots of animation, 
voiceover narration, music, and cartoon characters representing the player’s oppo-
nents; the player feels rather like a contestant on a TV game show.
Capitalism II (see Figure 18.5), a huge, sprawling business simulation covering all 
kinds of products and industries, develops in a different direction. In addition to 
showing pictures of the products and all the raw materials that go into them, the 
game allows players to construct or purchase buildings in cities, so there’s an 
attractive SimCity-like view as well.
Pure business simulations never have the pulse-pounding excitement of a ﬁ rst-per-
son shooter, but fans ﬁ nd them highly enjoyable games. As the designer, you need 
to work closely with the art director to make the essentially numeric nature of the 
gameplay as lively as possible.
TIP You can also 
create an advisor fea-
ture that consists only 
of an indicator that 
remains constantly on 
the screen, displaying 
the most urgent global 
need at all times. It 
doesn’t have to be a 
character.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONSTRUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SIMULATIONS 
537
 CHAPTER 18
FIGURE 18.5 
Capitalism II
FIGURE 18.4 
Mr. Bigshot is a pure 
business simulation 
without a construction 
aspect. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

538 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
DESIGN RULE Avoid Runaway Proﬁ ts!
Never let a player buy low and sell high as often as she wants without further expenditure 
or the passage of time. She’ll use it to rack up runaway proﬁ ts. See Chapter 10, “Core 
Mechanics,” for further discussion.
Hybrid Games
The Civilization, Dungeon Keeper, and Settlers series are all hybrid games, each one a 
cross between a CMS and a war game. In addition to their economic challenges, all 
feature exploration and conﬂ ict challenges. The military aspect of The Settlers is 
quite simple, as it must be, because the economic aspect is exceedingly complex. 
Dungeon Keeper begins each scenario with construction and management of a dun-
geon complete with semiautonomous denizens. In the later stages of the scenario, 
the player takes his army of creatures into battle, and the construction activities are 
ﬁ nished. Control in Dungeon Keeper is a curious hybrid of direct and indirect con-
trol in that creatures have a distinct behavior model but obey orders as long as 
they’re happy. (Unhappy creatures disobey or even desert.) However, Dungeon 
Keeper retains its economic challenges throughout: It’s one of the very few games
in which the troops have to be paid, fed, and given a place to sleep.
If you’re going to design a hybrid game, design the economic simulation ﬁ rst 
(unless it’s really simple) and then add the other elements afterward. Because the 
other aspects of the game usually depend on the underlying economy, a mistake in 
the economic design can easily ruin the rest of the game. For example, a war game 
that includes an economy for weapons production might lose all its strategic chal-
lenge if the player can produce weapons too quickly. The player will exploit his 
economic strength and overwhelm the opposition with sheer numbers rather than 
strategic skill.
Core Mechanics
Chapter 10 introduces the concepts of resources, sources, drains, and converters. 
Much of that material applies speciﬁ cally to CMSs, which use more kinds of 
resources than any other genre.
Resources
In many CMSs, the primary resource is money. Money is usually treated as an 
intangible resource; it is seldom seen in physical form. (Dungeon Keeper is an excep-
tion: Gold has to be mined and transported back to a treasury, and the player must 
expand the treasury when it gets full.)


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONSTRUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SIMULATIONS 
539
 CHAPTER 18
People are the other major resource in most CMSs. They are above all a source of 
tax money or labor. Most CMSs simulate people only as workers; children and the 
elderly don’t contribute to the economy of the game and so are not simulated. 
What sets people apart from other kinds of resources is that they have feelings:
In many games, they have to be kept happy, or they either leave or fail to act as 
desired. Consequently, managing their happiness becomes a big part of the game-
play, as the earlier section “Simulating Individuals” discusses.
Building materials are generally treated as tangible entities for games that imple-
ment the plan-and-build construction mechanic, described earlier. Those that 
implement the purchase-and-place mechanic don’t need to treat building materials 
as tangible, and some don’t make building materials a resource at all, going directly 
from money to constructed objects.
One game that treats all resources as tangible, including money, is The Settlers from 
Blue Byte Software. In The Settlers, every kind of resource (and there are many) 
must be transported from where it is produced either to storage areas or directly to 
places where it is consumed. Grain, for instance, must be carried from the grain 
farm to the windmill for grinding; the ﬂ our must be carried from the windmill to 
the bakery; and the bread must be carried from the bakery to the mines, where the 
miners eat it.
Table 18.1 lists some resources you commonly ﬁ nd in construction and manage-
ment simulations and how their sources and drains appear to the player.
RESOURCE
SOURCE
DRAIN
Money
Taxation on people or gold mines 
in the environment
Purchases and construction
People
Immigration and reproduction
Emigration and death
Food
Farms
People eating
Labor
People
Construction activities
Land
Part of the environment; 
claimed as it is explored 
No drain, but only a limited 
amount is available
Construction materials, 
such as wood
Found in raw form in the 
environment, such as trees 
Converted into buildings by 
construction activities 
Buildings
Constructed from money, 
materials, and labor 
Destroyed by demolition or 
disasters
The Construction Converter
Construction is a conversion activity that changes labor, money, and materials into 
buildings (or whatever the CMS constructs). Construction happens only when the 
player wants it to, so she controls the spending, and she can usually defer 
TABLE 18.1 
Common Resources 
and Their Sources 
and Drains


--- PAGE BREAK ---

540 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
construction until such time as she can afford it. Although it drains money, the 
player can see immediately what she gets in return, and in any case, it’s an invest-
ment because the constructed object does something useful in the economy.
Drains and Maintenance
A drain is a feature that takes a resource out of the game for good. Decay is the usual 
drain in construction and management simulations: Buildings or other entities 
wear out and have to be replaced, which costs money. In SimCity, for instance, the 
roads wear out and have to be repaved. If the player doesn’t repave them, the sims 
start to emigrate because they can’t get to work.
The player has to manage the repaving in SimCity personally, but in many games, 
these maintenance tasks are automated so the player only has to pay for them with-
out actually performing them. Maintenance annoys some players, who would 
rather buy something once and never have to worry about it again. However, main-
tenance is an important game balancing tool; it drains resources and prevents the 
player from building proﬁ ts endlessly. If you characterize maintenance as an ongo-
ing cost rather than a purchase of assets, it makes more sense. Paying employees is 
a maintenance cost. You can’t own employees, but you have to pay their wages on
a continuing basis; if you stop paying them, they stop working.
You may want to give the player the power to turn off or adjust the level of auto-
matically managed maintenance (and suffer the attendant consequences) so that 
he can make use of the money for something else that he needs in a hurry. 
Stronghold 2, a game about managing a medieval castle and its inhabitants, allows 
the player to set his peasants’ food rations to one of ﬁ ve levels: none, half, normal, 
extra, and double. With these settings, he can manage the peasants’ food consump-
tion, which is one of the drains in the game.
Disasters
Decay is a continuous drain that the player may or may not have to act upon, 
depending on whether you allow automatic maintenance. For a more dramatic 
effect that forces the player to act, you can include disasters. SimCity puts more 
pressure on the player by having ﬁ res, tornadoes, and monster invasions crop up 
periodically, doing considerable damage. If the player does not take action to repair 
the damage (which costs money), the city dies, not just through the destruction of 
buildings, but also through the loss of needed infrastructure such as roads and 
electrical lines. Disasters need not be natural ones, of course. In a good many 
games, the disaster is invasion by hostile armies.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONSTRUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SIMULATIONS 
541
 CHAPTER 18
THEME PARK, A DISGUSTING EXAMPLE OF POSITIVE FEEDBACK
Bullfrog Productions’ CMS Theme Park lets the player build a single theme park, ride by 
ride, into an empire of theme parks around the world. In addition to buying the rides, 
which attract visitors, the player builds shops and restaurants to extract money from them 
and hires maintenance and cleaning staff to keep the rides working and the park clean.
Each visitor to the park has a number of attributes: how much money he has, how hungry 
or thirsty he is, and so on. One of these attributes is his current degree of nausea. If a 
visitor becomes nauseated enough, he vomits, leaving a mess on the ground that has to 
be cleaned up. Nausea can be caused by three things: riding a particularly violent ride, 
being near an unclean bathroom, and—you guessed it—being near someone else’s 
vomit. In a crowded park, if the player hasn’t hired enough cleaning staff to deal with 
bathrooms and vomit, visitors create a chain-reaction of vomiting. This does nothing for 
the reputation of the park and tends to hurt future ticket sales but it does inject a degree 
of juvenile comic relief into an otherwise straightforward business simulation.
The Game World
It’s easy enough to say that CMSs focus on processes, but the processes must be 
meaningfully displayed on a computer screen and must ﬁ re the player’s imagina-
tion. To do either, you must have an attractive setting. CMSs take place in a 
simulated physical space, usually an outdoor world viewed from an aerial perspec-
tive in which the players can construct buildings or other objects. In the Caesar 
series, the player builds an ancient Roman town, so the setting is a landscape near 
a river. In the Civilization games, the player explores a world while at the same time 
advancing a civilization both culturally and technologically, so its setting is an 
entire continent or several of them.
CMSs are often set in 2D or 2.5D (layered 2D) worlds, even if they’re actually 
implemented with a 3D engine. Using a 2D world simpliﬁ es things for the player. 
Just as strategy games remove the logistics so that the player can concentrate on 
strategy (because he doesn’t have a staff to help him), so do CMSs remove the third 
dimension so that the player can concentrate on planning without worrying about 
the exact details (again because he doesn’t have a staff to help him). When a player 
lays down a water pipe from a reservoir to a neighborhood, he doesn’t want to have 
to worry about whether the pipe goes over or under the subway system. He just 
wants it to get where it needs to go.
NOTE  A few pure 
business simulations 
don’t take place in
a physical setting. The 
interaction model of 
Mr. Bigshot, discussed 
earlier, is contestant-
based and doesn’t use 
a location.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

542 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
The Presentation Layer
The emotional tone of a CMS game world—as evoked through sounds, art, and ani-
mation—should beﬁ t its theme of creativity and growth. A pure CMS set in a grim, 
decaying world wouldn’t be very popular. (As in several other respects, Dungeon Keeper
is an exception, but it is also a hybrid, not a pure CMS.) The player will also want a
clear, unobstructed view of things; fog, darkness, and shadows won’t help. The artwork
of CMSs is often reminiscent of the ligne claire style pioneered by the Belgian author
Hergé for his Tintin books: clean, strong lines, ﬂ at shading, and uniform lighting.
Interaction Model
The player is almost always multipresent in a CMS because she needs to see what is 
happening all over the game world. It’s difﬁ cult to control a large-scale process from 
the inside, where you can’t see everything that’s going on. Most CMSs don’t give the 
player any kind of avatar. However, players do like to see what the worlds they’re 
building look like from the inside, so games sometimes implement a walkthrough 
mode that lets players walk around the world in a ﬁ rst-person perspective. Dungeon 
Keeper is ordinarily played in a multipresent mode, but it is also possible for the 
player to take temporary control of a creature in her dungeon, walk it around, and 
view the game world through the creature’s eyes. This feature, while occasionally 
useful in the military aspects of Dungeon Keeper, is not at all helpful in the manage-
ment aspects. In short, walkthrough mode is entertaining and the player will enjoy 
it, but the primary interaction model in a CMS needs to be multipresent.
Camera Model
The camera model in a CMS naturally depends on what you are simulating. Most 
CMSs simulate a process taking place over a land area—whether it’s a city, a farm, 
or an entire planet. As a result, these games tend to use an isometric perspective. 
The early games were all tile-based, and some still are on smaller devices, but for 
the most part, modern CMSs now use 3D environments. This has the advantage 
that players can zoom in and out and move the camera freely, which lets them see 
a broad overview most of the time, then focus on a local problem when one arises.
If your game simulates a process taking place in a three-dimensional space, you might
ﬁ nd it useful to divide the space into layers to make it easier for the player to navigate
around the game world. It’s also helpful to provide a button that returns the camera
instantly to a default perspective so that the player can reorient himself if he gets lost.
User Interface
Because CMSs aren’t trying to create an illusion of reality in the way that ﬁ rst-per-
son shooters or ﬂ ight simulators do, their user interfaces can be more computerlike, 
using pull-down menus and rows of buttons along the edges of the screen. CMS 
games emphasize convenience over verisimilitude.
TIP CMS games need 
a pointing device—
a mouse or stylus. 
A small number of 
CMSs have been ported 
to machines that use 
joysticks, but the 
result is never really 
satisfactory. The Wii 
controller can also be 
used, but is not really 
as efﬁ cient as a mouse.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

