CONSTRUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SIMULATIONS 
545
 CHAPTER 18
Design Practice QUESTIONS
1. What process is the player going to manage? What actions will the player take in 
managing that process?
2. What resources exist in this process? For each resource, how is it produced, con-
sumed, stored, transported, and converted into other resources? Is it tangible, 
intangible, or a hybrid? Is it limited or unlimited? What determines its production 
and consumption rates?
3. Which resources can the player manipulate and which can she not?
4. Will the process settle into a balanced state or will it run down if not tended by 
the player? Will disasters affect it?
5. What will the player be constructing, and what function does the constructed 
item have? Will objects be purchased whole or planned and built over time? What 
does each item that the player can construct cost and how long does it take to build?
6. Can the player demolish or sell things that she builds? Does demolition cost or 
earn resources for the player?
7. Will the game have scenarios with victory conditions? What are they like?
8. What is the player’s perspective and interaction model with the game? Is there
a way to get inside the things she builds?
9. What analytical tools are provided to help her understand the workings of the 
simulation?
10. Is the simulated population modeled as individuals or as a statistical aggregate? 
If they are individuals, what is their behavior model? Are there multiple types of 
individuals? Can the player read their minds?
11. Will the game have advisors? What will they advise about?
12. Is this game a pure business simulation? Accounting and ﬁ nance are often con-
sidered rather dull, so what makes this compelling? Does the game have a setting? 
If not, how can it be made visually interesting?
13. Is the game a hybrid with other sorts of games? What other elements in the 
game make it a hybrid (strategic problems, action challenges, puzzles, and so on)? 
How do they affect the way the game is controlled?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Adventure Games
Adventure games are seldom a technological challenge to build, but what they lack 
in technological challenges they make up for in creative ones. As the designer of an 
adventure game, it’s your job to bring not just a story but a world to life—a world in 
which a story is taking place. Your talents at creating places, characters, plots, dia-
log, and puzzles will be tested as in no other genre. Because the adventure game is 
not limited by ﬂ ying or shooting or commanding troops in battle—indeed, it isn’t 
bound by any particular mode of interaction—it has the greatest potential for 
creativity of any genre.
This chapter deﬁ nes adventure games and covers the history and evolution of these 
games from text-based to today’s hybrids. We’ll explore the features common to 
adventure games and the gameplay mechanics that deﬁ ne the genre in depth. We’ll 
cover puzzle structure, game ﬂ ow, dialog, and language, all of which form 
integral parts of the adventure game. The chapter ﬁ nishes with a discussion of the 
art and user interface that is unique to this genre.
What Are Adventure Games?
The thirst for adventure is the vent which Destiny offers; a war, a crusade, a gold mine, a 
new country, speak to the imagination and offer swing and play to the conﬁ ned powers.
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON, “BOSTON,” IN NATURAL HISTORY OF THE INTELLECT, 1893
The term adventure game is a bit misleading because a lot of games about being 
adventurous aren’t adventure games—and a lot of adventure games aren’t about 
adventures, at least in the fairy-tale sense of going forth to seek one’s fortune. The 
reason for the term is historical. Adventure game is really short for Adventure-type 
game, meaning a game similar to the one named Adventure (sometimes referred to 
as Colossal Cave). All adventure games are conceptual descendants of the original 
Adventure, although nowadays they include many features that Adventure lacked.
Adventure games are quite different from most other games on the market. An 
adventure game isn’t a competition or a simulation. An adventure game doesn’t 
offer a process to manage or an opponent to defeat through strategy and tactics. 
Instead, an adventure game is an interactive story about a character whom the 
player controls. This character is the player’s avatar, but he’s more than merely a 
representative of the player. He is a ﬁ ctional person in his own right, a protagonist,
CHAPTER 19
546


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ADVENTURE GAMES 
547
 CHAPTER 19
 the hero of the story. A few adventure games have been made (most recently, 
Dreamfall) in which the player switches from one avatar to another at different 
points in the game, but they are not the norm.
ADVENTURE GAME An adventure game is an interactive story about a protagonist 
character who is played by the player. Storytelling and exploration are essential 
elements of the game. Puzzle solving and conceptual challenges make up the majority 
of the gameplay. Combat, economic management, and action challenges are reduced or 
nonexistent.
This deﬁ nition doesn’t mean that there is no conﬂ ict in adventure games (although 
many adventure games have none)—only that combat is not a primary activity. 
Adventure games seldom have an internal economy. All the relationships within 
the game are symbolic rather than numeric. Manipulating or optimizing an eco-
nomic system forms no part of the adventure game experience; this (among other 
things) sets them apart from role-playing games.
The Growth of Adventure Games
Adventure games were highly popular in the early days of personal computers. The 
earliest ones were text-only, which made them inexpensive to develop and allowed 
great scope for both the designer’s and the player’s imaginations. A group of stu-
dents at MIT, inspired by the original Adventure, wrote a much larger adventure 
game named Zork on the mainframe there. Soon afterward, they converted it to 
run on personal computers and founded a company, Infocom, devoted to develop-
ing text adventures. Infocom published games about all kinds of things: fantasy 
magic, ﬁ lm noir detective stories, exploration of an ancient Egyptian pyramid, and 
so on.
The original Adventure didn’t have any plot; it just offered a space to explore and 
puzzles to solve. With minor exceptions, its world did not change as time passed. 
But it wasn’t long before games began to explore the notion of interactive storytelling,
which Chapter 7, “Storytelling and Narrative,” discusses in detail. 
As soon as personal computers began to develop graphics capability (the very earli-
est were text-only), developers started to add graphics to adventure games, and the 
games really took off. LucasArts and Sierra On-Line dominated the genre and for a 
while produced the best-looking, richest games on the market: funny, scary, myste-
rious, and fascinating. Adventure games provided challenges and explored areas 
that other genres didn’t touch. Myst, a point-and-click graphic adventure, was for 
many years the best-selling personal computer game of all time. (It was later sup-
planted by The Sims.)
Adventure Games Today
In the past few years, the market for adventure games has grown less steadily than 
the market for other genres. Adventure games depend less on display technology 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

548 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
than fast-paced action games do; as a result, they get less attention from the gam-
ing press, contributing to a misconception that the adventure game genre is dead. 
In fact, adventure games are alive and well; they’re just not as highly publicized as 
their high-adrenaline cousins.
The ﬁ rst graphical adventure games came with gorgeously painted but static back-
drops for every scene that looked much like theatrical stage sets. Players could see a 
lot of things but could touch only a few of them. But when graphics technology 
began to render every object in three dimensions and it became possible to move 
freely among them, the world became much more immediate and alive. Many 
adventure games now display a 3D world.
The static-backdrop adventure game is still around, but nowadays it may use scenes 
created with 3D-rendering software and ray tracing rather than pixel painting. 
Myst, the ﬁ rst commercial game to use 3D-rendered backgrounds, owes some of its 
success to its sophisticated graphics.
Other genres are now adopting the puzzle and storytelling features that were once 
unique to the adventure genre.
ACTION-ADVENTURES
The arrival of 3D hardware also gave rise to a new sort of game, a hybrid of action 
game and adventure game called, unsurprisingly, an action-adventure. The action-
adventure is faster paced than a pure adventure game and includes physical as well 
as conceptual challenges. Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine provides a good 
example of the type. The modern Zelda games might be considered another, although 
with their levels and bosses, they are closer to being pure action games. Exactly 
when a game stops being an adventure game and becomes an action game is a mat-
ter of interpretation. Some might consider the Tomb Raider games to be action-
adventures because they include puzzles, but the puzzles are quite simple, and the 
games rely so heavily on physical challenges that they are really action games.
Many adventure game purists don’t care for action-adventures; generally, they dis-
like any sort of physical challenge or time pressure. If you plan to make your game 
an action-adventure, you should be aware that, although your design might appeal 
to some action gamers who might not otherwise buy your game, you might also 
discourage some adventure gamers who would. Without doubt, however, action-
adventure hybrids are now more popular than traditional adventure games.
THE REPLAYABILITY QUESTION
At ﬁ rst glance, the lack of replayability seems the greatest disadvantage of adven-
ture games. Most adventure games consist of a sequence of puzzles, each of which 
has a single solution; when you know the solution, there’s not much challenge in 
playing it again. An adventure game that requires 40 hours to ﬁ nish the ﬁ rst time 
might take only 4 hours the second time.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ADVENTURE GAMES 
549
 CHAPTER 19
To ameliorate this problem, consider making puzzle sequences or challenges that 
allow the player a choice of solutions. The consequences of the player’s choices can 
affect not only the game she is playing but also the story itself. The player who 
chooses to blow up the gate blocking her way might accidentally hurt someone in 
the process and be chased out of town. The player who needs a speciﬁ c key might 
have to steal it and be chased because she’s a thief. Offering alternative solutions 
adds to the replayability of the game. Adventure game puzzle design and challenges 
are discussed later in this chapter.
In practice, however, replayability isn’t much of a problem. Research shows that a 
great many players never ﬁ nish these games at all; even if the game offers 30 or 40 
hours of gameplay, many players play for only 15 or 20. This suggests that if they 
can’t replay a 40-hour game for another 40 hours, it’s unlikely to affect their pur-
chasing decision. Provided that the game gives good value for the money the ﬁ rst 
time around, it doesn’t necessarily need to be replayable.
Game Features
In adventure games, the player’s avatar visits an explorable area containing a vari-
ety of puzzles or problems to solve. Solving these problems opens new areas for 
exploration or advances the storyline, giving the player new information and
new problems to solve. Exploring the environment and manipulating items in it 
are essential elements of an adventure game. Many players also enjoy interacting 
with a wide variety of characters. The more different kinds of people your game 
contains, the richer it will be—a quality that adventure games share with role-
playing games.
Adventure games typically offer only a few gameplay modes. Unlike sports games, 
with all of the associated team-management functions, or war games, with associ-
ated battle-planning modes, adventure games don’t need a lot of specialized 
screens. Apart from the need to look at a map or the avatar’s inventory or to exam-
ine objects closely, the player always sees and interacts with the world in the same 
way, and that doesn’t change from one end of the game to the other.
Setting and Emotional Tone
In some kinds of games, such as chess and Quake, the setting is almost irrelevant. 
Serious players ignore the idea that chess is a medieval war game or that Quake
involves space marines on an alien planet. They concentrate on the bare essentials 
of the gameplay: strategy in the former case and blazing action in the latter. If the 
setting intrudes, it is only a distraction.
Adventure games reverse this situation. The setting contributes more to the enter-
tainment value of an adventure game than settings in any other genre. Whether 
it’s grim and depressing, fantastic and outlandish, or funny and cheerful, the 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

550 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
setting creates the world the player explores and lives in. For many players, the set-
ting is the reason for playing adventure games in the ﬁ rst place.
The majority of computer games offer little emotional subtlety. Games of pure strat-
egy have no emotional content at all; action games and war games have little more. 
Nor do most single-player games inspire complex emotions in the player. “Yippee!” 
and “Damn!” are about the limit of it—exhilaration and frustration, respectively. 
Role-playing games (RPGs), with their deeper stories, offer greater opportunities for 
emotional expression, but even when their designers take advantage of this depth, 
the emotion tends to get lost in a morass of bookkeeping. Multiplayer games are an 
exception; their social context allows for richer interactions because they take place 
among real people.
Adventure games are always single-player games, so they can’t rely on social inter-
actions to create richness. They don’t have intricate strategy, high-speed action, or 
management details to occupy the player’s attention. The games move more slowly, 
which gives designers the chance to create a world with a distinct emotional tone. 
Good examples from the past and present are Phantasmagoria, one of the ﬁ rst 
graphical horror games; the Myst series, with its surreal buildings and empty 
spaces; and Shadow of the Colossus’s vast and beautiful landscapes, which make it 
distinctly more than an ordinary action-adventure.
Interaction Model
Adventure games always use an avatar-based interaction model because the 
designer wants to put the player inside a story. However, the nature of the avatar in 
adventure games has changed over the years. The early games Adventure and Myst
used nonspeciﬁ c avatars, an idea discussed in Chapter 6, “Character Development.” 
In effect, the games pretended that the player was the avatar.
Eventually, however, game designers abandoned this model so that they could develop 
games in which the avatar possessed a personality of his own, someone who belonged 
in the game world rather than being a visitor there. Sierra On-Line’s Leisure Suit Larry
series and Revolution Software’s Broken Sword games are good examples. In these 
games, the player can see his avatar walking around, interacting with the world.
Camera Model
The preferred camera model of graphical adventure games is changing. The con-
text-sensitive approach is traditional, but third- and ﬁ rst-person games are 
becoming increasingly common. This section discusses the advantages and disad-
vantages of these approaches.
CONTEXT-SENSITIVE MODEL
Using a context-sensitive model, the game depicts the avatar from whatever camera 
angle is most appropriate for her current location in the game world. If the avatar 
NOTE The oldest 
graphical adventure 
games used static 
painted backdrops, 
not a freely-moving 
camera in a 3D space, 
to display each scene. 
Many still do. The 
painted backdrop 
still qualiﬁ es as a 
context-sensitive cam-
era model, however, 
because the camera 
angle changes as the 
avatar moves from 
scene to scene.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ADVENTURE GAMES 
551
 CHAPTER 19
moves to a new location that is signiﬁ cantly different from the previous one, the 
camera behavior takes this into account. For example, going from indoors to out-
doors, the camera might move farther away from the avatar to show more of the 
environment.
In the early days of graphic adventure games, the camera angles tended to be quite 
dull, as in Figure 19.1, from Leisure Suit Larry in the Land of the Lounge Lizards.
As display hardware improved, game development required more artists and the 
quality of the artwork improved considerably. Today the game’s art director 
chooses a camera position designed to show off each location and activity to best 
effect. Compare Figure 19.1 with Figure 19.2 from A Vampyre Story.
FIGURE 19.1 
A scene in the ﬁ rst 
Leisure Suit Larry game
FIGURE 19.2 
A scene in A Vampyre 
Story. The lowered 
camera position 
accentuates the main 
character’s height. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

552
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
A context-sensitive perspective lets you (or the art director) play cinematographer, 
using camera angles, composition, and lighting to enhance the story. Use these 
techniques with discretion, however. A light touch is best. If you watch movies 
closely, you’ll notice that the majority of shots use a pretty straightforward camera 
angle. Movie directors switch to an unusual angle when they have a particular 
point to make, such as showing that the protagonist is alone, or in a high place.
THE SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND
The Secret of Monkey Island, now nearly 20 years old, remains worth studying because it 
spawned a highly successful franchise. Although it is ostensibly set on a Caribbean island 
in the 1700s and concerns a young man who wants to be a pirate, the game features 
anachronistic touches and is played for laughs. In that respect, it seems a lot like certain 
Disney animated ﬁ lms—The Jungle Book, for example—although slightly edgier.
When Ron Gilbert, the designer of The Secret of Monkey Island, started work on the 
game, he had already created an adventure game engine called SCUMM, an acronym for 
“Script Creation Utility for Maniac Mansion” (an earlier LucasArts adventure game). 
SCUMM represented an important innovation for graphic adventure games: It put the 
possible actions on the screen so players no longer had to guess what their options were, 
and it did away with typing. More important for the developers, SCUMM enabled them to 
create new adventure games easily without programming them from scratch each time. 
Three of the ﬁ ve Monkey Island games used the SCUMM utility in addition to Maniac
Mansion itself and several other LucasArts games.
The Secret of Monkey Island includes a number of other innovations as well, most notably 
an insult-driven sword ﬁ ght between the avatar, Guybrush Threepwood, and a master 
swordswoman. Rather than making the ﬁ ght a physical challenge, which would have 
required a lot of additional programming and would have turned off some players, 
Gilbert chose to use (and make fun of) the way adversaries always insult one another in 
old swashbuckling movies. When his adversary insults Guybrush, the player must choose 
an appropriate comeback quip. Choosing a good comeback gives Guybrush advantage in 
the ﬁ ght; choosing the wrong one forces Guybrush to retreat. For Guybrush to win the 
ﬁ ght, he must choose enough correct quips. The insults themselves contain clues as to 
which reply is correct, so players don’t have to ﬁ nd out by trial and error.
It’s this kind of lateral thinking about the design that separates great adventure games 
from merely good ones. The Monkey Island series belongs among the greats. The origi-
nal game has since been remade with higher quality graphics and has been released as 
The Secret of Monkey Island: Special Edition.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ADVENTURE GAMES 
553
 CHAPTER 19
FIRST-PERSON PERSPECTIVE
One of the most famous graphic adventure games of all, Myst, used a ﬁ rst-person
perspective. You may be familiar with the look of contemporary ﬁ rst-person games, 
but unlike these, Myst did not render a three-dimensional game world in real time 
even though it used a ﬁ rst-person perspective. The Myst world consisted of a large 
number of prerendered still frames that appeared one at a time as the avatar walked 
around. Prerendering made ﬁ nely detailed and highly atmospheric images possible. 
On the other hand, Myst couldn’t depict continuously moving objects or changes 
in the sunlight as time passed, and the number of angles from which the player 
could look at things was limited. The world was rich but static.
A real-time 3D ﬁ rst-person perspective gives the player the best sense of being in 
the world but doesn’t let the player see his avatar unless he happens upon some 
functioning reﬂ ective surface in the game world. This perspective also tends to 
encourage a more action-oriented approach to playing the game, running around 
without paying much attention to the surroundings. Because much of the enter-
tainment of an adventure game comes from seeing the avatar explore the world 
and interact with other characters, the ﬁ rst-person perspective doesn’t offer as 
many opportunities for visual drama as other perspectives do.
THIRD-PERSON PERSPECTIVE
The third-person perspective keeps the player’s avatar constantly in view, as in 
Indiana Jones and the Emperor’s Tomb, an action-adventure hybrid. This perspective 
is common for action-adventures in which the player might need to react quickly 
(see Figure 19.3).
If the camera in the third-person perspective always remains behind the avatar’s 
back, however, the view can become rather dull and doesn’t let the player appreci-
ate the environment. And unlike pure action games in which the avatar’s actions 
FIGURE 19.3 
Indiana Jones and the 
Emperor’s Tomb. This 
is the typical action-
adventure perspective. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

554 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
and motivations are simple, adventure games sometimes need camera perspectives 
that allow for more subtle situations. In Figure 19.4, from Gabriel Knight 3, Gabriel 
hides to see when the maid leaves the room.
The later Gabriel Knight games also allowed the player to move the camera around 
somewhat (see Figure 19.5)—as do most of the better action games. This mimics 
how a real person can turn his head to look in a given direction without moving 
his whole body.
Player Roles
In most video games, the player’s role is largely deﬁ ned by the challenges offered, 
whether as an athlete in a sports game, a pilot in a ﬂ ight simulator, or a martial arts 
expert in a ﬁ ghting game. But adventure games can be ﬁ lled with all kinds of 
FIGURE 19.4 
Gabriel Knight 3 in 
a context-sensitive 
camera angle
FIGURE 19.5 
Gabriel Knight as seen 
from a player-adjusted 
camera position. 
The Volkswagen bus 
would not be visible 
if the camera were 
behind him. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ADVENTURE GAMES 
555
 CHAPTER 19
puzzles and problems unrelated to the player’s stated role. Indiana Jones is suppos-
edly an archaeologist, but we don’t see him digging very much. The role of the 
player in an adventure game arises not out of the challenges (unless you speciﬁ cally 
want it to), but out of the story. The player can still be a pilot, if that’s what the 
story requires, but that doesn’t necessarily guarantee that she’ll get to ﬂ y a plane. 
And she might be anything else or nothing in particular—just an ordinary person 
living in an extraordinary situation.
A good many adventure games do connect the player’s role with the game’s activi-
ties, however. Almost all adventure games treat the story as a journey (see the 
section “The Story as a Journey” in Chapter 7), mapping the plot of the story onto 
physical travel through the game world, so the player’s role often involves travel or 
investigation: explorer, detective, hunter, conquistador, and so on.
Be sure that the player’s role is suitable for the genre, however, or it could be frus-
trating for the player. Heart of China, an otherwise straightforward adventure game, 
included a poorly implemented 3D tank simulator. To get beyond a speciﬁ c point, 
the player had to use the tank simulator successfully. This created a real problem; 
adventure game enthusiasts seldom play vehicle simulations, and many could not 
get past that point. The obligatory action element spoiled the game for them.
Story and Spatial Structure
Because adventure games map a story onto a space, they establish a relationship 
between different locations in the world and different parts of the story. Over the 
years, the nature of this relationship has evolved. The earliest adventure games, 
including the original Adventure, emphasized exploration at the expense of story. 
The game provided few cues that could give the player a sense of time passing—
that is, of making progress through a story toward an ending. The game simply 
gave her a large space and told her to wander around. Structurally, the game looked 
rather like the drawing in Figure 19.6.
S
E
FIGURE 19.6 
The structure of early 
adventure games. Each 
circle represents a 
room. S is the starting 
room, and E is the end. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

556 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
As adventure games became larger and began to include a more detailed story, 
designers started to break them into chapters (see Figure 19.7). The player could 
wander around all he liked in the area devoted to a given chapter, but when he 
moved on to the next chapter, the story advanced and there was no way back. This 
made the story more linear, which made it both easier to write for and easier to pro-
gram. If the player needed to take a particular object from one chapter to the next, 
the story would not let him progress until that object was in his inventory. This 
arrangement is functionally identical to the foldback story structure I describe in 
Chapter 7. In a foldback story, the player has some dramatic freedom, but his 
options eventually narrow to a single inevitable event before they branch out 
again. In adventure games, this inevitable event is normally the transition to the 
next chapter.
S
E
With the arrival of 3D graphics and the action-adventure, the stories became more 
linear still. Areas occasionally offered simple side branches but few complex spaces 
to explore. The space in an action-adventure is structured more like that of an 
indoor ﬁ rst-person shooter (see Figure 19.8), because action-adventures emphasize 
conﬂ ict challenges (often shooting and ﬁ ghting) over exploration. A good many 
action-adventures have a lot more action than they do adventuring.
S
E
FIGURE 19.7 
The structure of 
story-driven adventure 
games
FIGURE 19.8 
The structure of action-
adventure games
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ADVENTURE GAMES 
557
 CHAPTER 19
Storytelling
Chapter 7 discusses storytelling at length. This section reiterates a few of the key 
points and talks about their signiﬁ cance in adventure games, because adventure 
games rely on storytelling more than any other genre.
DRAMATIC TENSION
Dramatic tension, which arises from an unresolved situation or problem, is what 
holds the reader’s attention and keeps her around to see how the story comes out.
To create dramatic tension, start by presenting the problem. In adventure games, 
this often happens in a cut-scene right at the beginning of the game. The meaning 
of the scene doesn’t have to be immediately clear; mystery and uncertainty may 
help set the mood for your story. For example, The Longest Journey begins when 
April Ryan, the player’s avatar and heroine of the game, has been having increas-
ingly vivid nightmares whose meaning she does not understand. At the beginning 
of the game, she has no goal other than to ﬁ nd out why she’s having nightmares. 
Later, dramatic tension increases as the player learns the source of those night-
mares and new problems emerge.
The resolution of dramatic tension occurs at a moment called the dramatic climax, 
usually near the end of the story. Shorter stories frequently have only one source of 
dramatic tension and one dramatic climax; longer stories can have several, of pro-
gressively increasing importance. An extremely long story can have several major 
dramatic climaxes at intervals, tied together by a common theme, setting, or char-
acters. Richard Wagner’s cycle of four operas, The Ring of the Nibelungs, is one such 
extended work. Each opera is a self-contained story with its own dramatic climax, 
although some characters carry over from one opera to the next, and all of the 
operas concern the fate of the same magic ring.
Because adventure games are usually much longer than movies or short stories, you 
will probably want to create several different dramatic climaxes as well—each one 
resolving a current or immediate problem until the last climax, which should 
resolve the overall problem of the whole story. In the adventure game, dramatic 
tension is created through the combination of dramatic storytelling and interactive 
puzzles. Impending doom that can only be stopped by the player’s intervention 
can provide a dramatic point to the story, as long as the player doesn’t feel as 
though the tension is contrived.
As an adventure game designer, you can use puzzles to create a minor form of dra-
matic tension. However, puzzles of the types designers usually employ (as the later 
section “Challenges” describes) alone are not enough to keep the player actively 
interested in the story for the length of the game. Puzzles present small, individual 
problems. Your story needs a larger problem that underpins the whole story, some-
thing that, even if it isn’t revealed to the player at the beginning of the game, is the 
reason that there is a story.
TIP Remember the 
adage from creative 
writing: show, don’t 
tell. Set the mood and 
amplify the tension in 
your story using music, 
well-chosen color pal-
ettes, camera angles, 
lighting, and architec-
ture. Never say that 
something is scary, 
make it scary. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

558 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
THE HEROIC QUEST
The majority of adventure games fall into the category of heroic quests, each one a 
mission by a single individual to accomplish some great (or, in the case of Leisure 
Suit Larry, not-so-great) feat. You can imagine adventure games structured along 
other lines but will ﬁ nd few on the market that don’t adhere to the heroic quest 
scenario. Although it’s possible to write an adventure game based on a detailed 
character study, no one has done so as a commercial product.
The heroic quest traditionally involves a movement from the familiar to the unfa-
miliar and from a time of low danger to a time of great danger. The biggest, most 
dramatic climax you offer the player should be the last major climax in the game 
because anything that follows is likely to seem irrelevant. Remember that the boss 
enemies appear at the ends of levels in action games; if you defeat the Lord of 
Terror, it feels anticlimactic and rather unfair to have to ﬁ ght his second-in-com-
mand afterward.
Occasionally exceptions to this structure arise, such as in stories in which the hero 
is abducted at the beginning, escapes, and must return to his home. However, in 
these stories, the protagonist’s struggles don’t get easier and easier until he just 
strolls in happily. He often returns home to ﬁ nd that things have changed for the 
worse and must be corrected or that he must leave again to hunt down his abductor.
None of this means that there can’t ever be periods of quiet; in fact, there should 
be. In both of J. R. R. Tolkien’s most famous books, The Hobbit and The Lord of the 
Rings, periods of great danger alternate with periods of safety and rest for the 
heroes, during which they regain their strength. A long story that consists of noth-
ing but action will feel unrealistic and silly after a while.
The works of Joseph Campbell and Christopher Vogler discuss the heroic quest at 
length. (See the references for details.)
THE PROBLEM OF DEATH
For many years, game designers have debated the question of whether adventure 
games should allow the player to make a fatal mistake. Some adventure games 
proudly advertise on their boxes that the avatar can’t ever die; the manuals of other 
games warn that the player might encounter mortal danger. In some respects, this 
seems like a strange thing to worry about. After all, avatars routinely die in action 
games and in ﬂ ight simulator crashes, so why shouldn’t they be able to die in 
adventure games?
The nature of the gameplay makes the question controversial. In a ﬁ rst-person 
shooter or a military ﬂ ight simulator, it’s obvious that the avatar is in mortal peril 
all the time. In fact, in games of most genres, it’s win or lose, kill or be killed by 
clearly marked enemies, all the time. Adventure games differ because they seldom 
provide an explicitly declared enemy; instead, the game encourages the player to go 
everywhere and touch everything. If you tell the player to explore the world and 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ADVENTURE GAMES 
559
 CHAPTER 19
then you ﬁ ll it with deathtraps, he’s in for a frustrating time. Nowadays, most 
adventure games adopt a “fair warning” approach, making it clear when an object 
or action threatens danger and (usually) offering a way of neutralizing or circum-
venting that danger. If you put a dragon in a cave, it’s a nice touch to litter the 
entrance with the bones of earlier adventurers. That ought to get the point across.
Most adventure games supply a save-game feature, so death isn’t necessarily cata-
strophic; on the other hand, stopping to save the game does tend to hurt the 
player’s feeling of immersion. Adventure games shouldn’t be so dangerous that the 
player needs to save all the time. If you are going to let the player’s avatar be killed 
in your game, make sure to use an autosave feature to save the game at intervals, 
which allows the player to restore it later, even if he hasn’t explicitly saved it. The 
player doesn’t have to know that the game is being saved for him; telling him only 
harms the suspension of disbelief.
Challenges
The majority of challenges in an adventure game are conceptual: puzzles that can 
only be solved by lateral thinking. The following list of a few popular puzzles—of 
the many types available—will help get you started:
■ Finding keys to locked doors. Locked door refers to any obstruction that pre-
vents progress and a key is any object that removes the obstruction. Because this 
type of puzzle is so common, the challenge for you as a designer is to give players 
enough variety that the door-and-key puzzles don’t all seem the same.
■ Figuring out mysterious machines. This is, in effect, a combination lock 
instead of a lock with a key. The player manipulates a variety of knobs to make a 
variety of indicators show the correct reading. Try to make the presence of these 
knobs reasonably plausible—too many adventure games include mysterious 
machines that clearly function only as puzzles, not as realistic parts of the game 
world.
■ Obtaining inaccessible objects. In this kind of puzzle, the player can see but 
not reach an object, which may be a treasure or a key to open some door elsewhere 
in the game world (remember that this doesn’t need to be an actual key). The 
player must ﬁ nd a clever way of reaching the object, perhaps by building some 
device that gives her access.
■ Manipulating people. Sometimes an obstruction is not a physical object but a 
person, and the trick is to ﬁ nd out what makes the person go away or lets the player 
pass. If it’s a simple question of giving the obstructor something he wants, then the 
problem is really just a lock-and-key puzzle. For a more creative approach, create a 
puzzle in which the person must be either defeated or distracted. The player should 
have to talk to him to learn his weaknesses.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

560 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ Navigating mazes. Use mazes—confusing areas that make it difﬁ cult for the 
player to know where she is or where to go—sparingly. Making a bad maze is easy; 
making an interesting maze is difﬁ cult. A maze should always contain clues that an 
observant player can notice and use to help her learn her way around.
■ Decoding cryptic messages. Many players enjoy decoding messages, as long as 
you give sufﬁ cient clues to help out.
■ Solving memorization puzzles. These puzzles require the player to remember 
where something is—a variant of the game Concentration. She can usually defeat 
these by taking notes, but that’s reasonable enough; it’s how we remember things 
anyway. The real challenge for you as the designer is to create a realistic reason for 
a memorization puzzle to be in the game.
■ Collecting things. The player must ﬁ nd a number of objects. These may be the 
scattered pieces of a larger object, a set of related items (such as 12 identical gems), 
or simply miscellaneous treasures. Make the player meet challenges to reveal or 
retrieve these items; simply ﬁ nding and picking them up isn’t really a challenge.
■ Doing detective work. Instead of solving a puzzle per se, the player ﬁ gures out a 
sequence of events from clues and interviews with witnesses. The situation doesn’t 
necessarily have to involve a crime; you could use any unknown event. Detective 
work forms the basis for many police-procedure games.
■ Understanding social problems. This doesn’t refer to inﬂ ation or unemploy-
ment. The challenges of understanding and perhaps inﬂ uencing the relationships 
between people make up a little-explored aspect of adventure game design. Most 
adventure games limit characters to very simple, mechanical states of mind. If we 
devote a little more effort, people, rather than objects, could become the primary 
subject of adventure games, and this would make the games much more 
interesting.
When designing puzzles, try to allow for lateral thinking of the players. If there’s 
more than one way to solve a puzzle, don’t arbitrarily restrict the player to your pre-
ferred method. Obviously, you can’t build in multiple solutions to every puzzle, but 
if the player tries something entirely logical and there’s no good reason why it 
doesn’t work, she’s going to be frustrated. Only play-testing can tell you whether a 
puzzle is too hard or too easy, and you can’t adjust an adventure game’s difﬁ culty 
by tweaking some numbers the way you can adjust the difﬁ culty of games in some 
other genres.
Conversations with Nonplayer Characters
From the original Adventure onward, adventure game designers have faced the prob-
lem of how to create realistic NPCs. Computer role-playing game (CRPG) designers 
must address this problem, too, but in most CRPGs, an NPC’s conversation is 
deﬁ ned by the character’s role: blacksmith, healer, tavern keeper, and so on. The 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ADVENTURE GAMES 
561
 CHAPTER 19
player doesn’t expect to be able to discuss arms and armor with a tavern keeper 
(although the games might be more interesting and certainly less formulaic if he 
could). But because adventure games are interactive stories, players expect the char-
acters in them to be more like humans and less mechanical.
A good many games try to sidestep the problem entirely by setting the game in 
worlds with extremely few, if any, people. This certainly creates a mysterious
atmosphere, but it suits only a limited range of stories. Imagine how Rick’s bar
in Casablanca would feel if it weren’t full of people drinking and gambling. A
world with no people seems artiﬁ cial and sterile.
A few early text-based games tried to implement parsers that could understand lim-
ited English sentences as typed by the player, but these seldom succeeded. NPCs 
either said, “I don’t understand that,” or gave absurd answers when the player asked 
a perfectly reasonable question; this left the impression that the NPCs were 
drugged or mentally ill.
In the end, most adventure game designers gave up on trying to create the impres-
sion that the player could talk to anyone about anything and devised the scripted 
conversation, a mechanism that became the de facto standard for both adventure 
games and CRPGs. Chapter 7 discussed scripted conversations in detail.
Mapping
When playing text adventures, players usually needed to make maps for themselves 
as they went along, because they found it difﬁ cult to remember how the rooms in 
the game world related to one another. With the arrival of graphical adventures, 
mapping became less critical because the graphics provide cues about how the play-
er’s current location relates to other areas in the world. However, it’s still a good 
idea to give the player a map. A few games deliberately deny the player a map to 
make the game more difﬁ cult, but this is poor design. There’s not a lot of fun in 
being lost. If you force the player to make his own map, he has to constantly look 
away from the screen to a sketchpad at his side; that’s a tedious business that rap-
idly destroys suspension of disbelief.
The map that you give the player doesn’t have to be complete at the beginning of 
the game; it can start out empty and be ﬁ lled in as the player moves around, a pro-
cess called automapping. It’s also a good idea to give the player a compass to tell him 
which direction he’s facing, unless the map orients itself for him. You can also include 
the map as an item to be found in the game, along the lines of a treasure map. 
Automapping destroys the challenge imposed by mazes, but mazes are one of the 
most overused and least-enjoyed features of adventure games. Unless you have a 
strong reason for including a maze (such as re-creating the adventures of Theseus 
in the Minotaur’s labyrinth) and can construct one that’s really clever and fun to 
be in, don’t do it. If you strongly feel you should have a maze, consider making it 
an optional mini-game.
NOTE The most 
ambitious effort to 
create a parser that 
understands natural 
language in video 
games is the experi-
mental game Façade.
The player takes the 
role of a friend of a 
bickering couple, and 
can inﬂ uence their 
relationship by speak-
ing to them (through 
typed sentences) in 
plain English. You can 
download Façade free 
of charge at www.
interactivestory.net.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

562 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Journal Keeping
Another common feature of adventure games—one that is conceptually similar to 
automapping—is automatic journal keeping. The game ﬁ lls in a journal with text as 
the player goes along, recording important events or information she uncovers. If 
the game includes a convoluted plot or large numbers of characters, the journal can 
be an invaluable reference tool for the player. Let her call it up and look at it at any 
reasonable time (though not, perhaps, while hanging over the edge of a cliff or 
being interrogated by a villain). As with conversations with NPCs, the journal gives 
you an opportunity to deﬁ ne the avatar’s character through his use of language. 
Journals are ideal for games in which the player must collect informational clues, 
such as mysteries in the Nancy Drew series.
A Few Things to Avoid
As adventure games evolved, designers created many different kinds of puzzles and 
experiences for the player. Some of these are extremely clever, such as the insult-
driven sword ﬁ ght in The Secret of Monkey Island. A good many others, however, 
proved to be only tiresome time wasters, obstacles that add no entertainment value 
to the game.
PUZZLES SOLVABLE ONLY BY TRIAL AND ERROR
If you give the player a puzzle that has a ﬁ xed number of possible solutions of equal 
probability (in effect, a combination lock), but no hints about which solution is 
right, then the player simply has to try them all. The Infocom text adventure Inﬁ del
included a puzzle like this: The player had to line up four statues of Egyptian god-
desses in the correct order, but there were no clues about what the correct order 
might be. The player could do nothing but try all 24 possible combinations and 
keep track of the ones she had already tried. There’s not much fun in that. Instead, 
ﬁ nd clever ways to provide the clues.
CONCEPTUAL NON SEQUITURS
This is a variant of the trial-and-error puzzle, a problem whose solution requires 
thinking so lateral that it’s completely irrational. The term describes something 
along the lines of “put the sombrero on the bulldozer” or “sharpen the headphones 
with the banana.” A few games try to get away with this by claiming that it’s surre-
alism, but true surrealism is informed by some kind of underlying point; it’s not 
just random weirdness. Chapter 12, “General Principles of Level Design,” discusses 
conceptual non sequiturs at greater length.
A variant of this is the opposite-reaction puzzle, one whose solution turns out to be 
the exact opposite of what you’d expect. In the original Adventure, the player could 
drive away a menacing snake by releasing a little bird from its cage. Fortunately, at 
that point in Adventure, the player didn’t have many options, so he usually found 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ADVENTURE GAMES 
563
 CHAPTER 19
the solution quickly. But unless you design an entire game on this principle, players 
may see it as just an annoying gimmick.
ILLOGICAL SPACES
Illogical spaces were a classic challenge in text adventures. If you went north from 
room A, you got to room B, but if you went south from room B, you didn’t neces-
sarily go back to room A. Modern games use teleporters to provide a similar effect; 
the player may step out of a teleporter with no idea where it has taken her. In such 
a space, the player simply has to wander around taking notes until she can ﬁ gure 
out the relationships among the various locations. Unless you offer some clues, this 
is another puzzle that can be solved only by trial and error.
PUZZLES REQUIRING OUTSIDE KNOWLEDGE
Many adventure games include references to things outside the game world for 
comic effect, but those references shouldn’t be part of a puzzle. A game that 
requires the player to know information from a source other than itself is unfair. 
For example, Haunt offered puzzles that only players familiar with the movie Monty 
Python and the Holy Grail could solve. It didn’t really matter because Haunt was a 
game made by a student for fun, but in a commercial game, such puzzles would be 
unreasonable unless you explicitly make it clear that the game requires the player 
to know trivial facts. If you want to make humorous references to popular TV 
shows, movies, and so on, do them in narrative events or in an NPC’s conversation 
rather than as solutions to puzzles. Beware, though: Cultural references age quickly 
and will make the game seem dated after a few years.
You have to be even more careful when developing games for foreign markets 
because other countries don’t always have the same idioms. For instance, the 
action, “Wear the lampshade on my head,” could cause other characters in the 
game to assume that the player’s avatar is drunk, which might be desirable in 
the context of the story. However, wearing a lampshade as a sign of drunkenness is 
an American cultural idiom that might not be understood in, say, Japan. Again, it’s 
OK to make cultural references in your game; just be careful about requiring the 
user to understand them in order to win.
CLICK-THE-RIGHT-PIXEL PUZZLES
A few adventure games with point-and-click user interfaces require the player to 
click a tiny and inconspicuous area of the screen to advance the story for no partic-
ular reason except that that particular pixel is difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd. This is lazy design—
a cheap way of creating an obstacle for the player without any entertainment value. 
Indiana Jones and the Holy Grail, for example, requires the player to click exactly on 
one pixel during the end game in order to duck under a swinging blade. For most 
players, this is a tedious and irritating solution to a well-known movie sequence.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

564 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
TOO MANY BACKWARD PUZZLES
A backward puzzle is one in which the player ﬁ nds the solution before ﬁ nding the 
puzzle itself. She ﬁ nds a key but doesn’t yet know of any locked doors. However, 
she picks it up and carries it around with her all the time, just in case. When she 
does eventually ﬁ nd a locked door, she immediately has the solution, which means 
it’s not much of a puzzle. By including a large number of backward puzzles, you 
force the player to carry around a big inventory of stuff that she has no idea why 
she’s carrying. It encourages players to pick up everything they see whether they 
need it or not, which is now considered an outdated mechanic and harmful to the 
game’s immersion. A few backward puzzles are OK; a world full is poor design.
You may run across situations where you didn’t intend to insert a backward puzzle 
in your game, but the player ﬁ nds the solution before ﬁ nding the puzzle because 
it’s difﬁ cult to predict in what order the player will traverse the terrain of the game. 
It’s not always possible to prevent the player from ﬁ nding the solution ﬁ rst because 
the solution has to be available, but it can be inconspicuous—a poster on a wall full 
of posters or an object in a trash can. Be aware, however, that inconspicuous is not 
the same as obscure or nonsensical. If the key to a puzzle involves ﬁ nding a live mon-
key, the monkey shouldn’t turn out to be locked in a freezer.
TOO MANY FEDEX PUZZLES
A FedEx puzzle is one that you solve by picking up an object from one place and tak-
ing it to a different place, as if you were a courier. Of course, carrying objects 
around until you ﬁ nd a place to use them is a common feature of adventure games, 
but some games consist of little else. This gets dull after a while, especially if the 
solution to a puzzle consists only of fetching and carrying without any lateral 
thinking or other activity. Liven up the game with a variety of puzzles and tasks. 
Create objects that have a variety of different uses, such as Indy’s bullwhip in 
Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine, or objects that are left over from one puzzle 
but have a part to play in another.
The Presentation Layer
Adventure games, more than most other genres, try to hide the fact that the player 
is using a computer. When compared to vehicle simulators, sports games, or RPGs, 
adventure games offer very simple user interfaces. The player needs to move through 
the world, talk to NPCs, and manipulate or collect objects using intuitive com-
mands or actions that do not interfere with his sense of immersion in the story.
Avatar Movement
The movement interface that you design depends considerably on the perspective 
you choose. When playing from a ﬁ rst-person or third-person perspective, the 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ADVENTURE GAMES 
565
 CHAPTER 19
player needs a way of steering her avatar around the world, as in an action game. 
Chapter 13, “Action Games,” includes a discussion of avatar movement in games 
featuring ﬁ rst- and third-person perspectives.
Games featuring context-sensitive perspective commonly use one of two user inter-
faces: point-and-click or direct control.
POINT-AND-CLICK INTERFACES
In this user interface, the player clicks with a mouse cursor somewhere on the 
screen. If the corresponding location in the game is accessible, the avatar walks to 
it. If the player clicks an active object, the avatar walks to that object and picks it 
up or manipulates it in an appropriate way. The section “Manipulating Objects” 
later in this chapter discusses object management more extensively. The disadvan-
tage of a point-and-click UI is that the player can easily point to areas that aren’t 
accessible to the avatar (halfway up a cliff for example). Sometimes an area that 
looks as if it should be perfectly accessible is actually inaccessible, which can be 
frustrating for the player.
The point-and-click interface is an indirect control mechanism and was for many 
years the de facto standard for adventure games. It makes the player feel as if the 
avatar is a person separate from himself rather than a puppet whose every move-
ment is directly controlled, and this contributes to the depth of the character. First 
the player clicks, then the avatar walks—if she can; if she can’t, she will usually say 
so aloud. It works well in traditional adventure games with no action challenges. 
However, because traditional adventures are increasingly rare and action-adventure 
hybrids have become more common, the point-and-click interface is gradually 
being replaced by direct control interfaces.
DIRECT CONTROL INTERFACES
In a direct control user interface, the player steers the avatar around the game 
world, rather like driving a car. On a console controller, the joystick or D-pad nor-
mally manages this; on a personal computer, the mouse or keyboard steers the 
avatar as in an action game. This is now the standard for action-adventure games, 
whether in third-person or context-sensitive camera models. A few more traditional 
adventure games have started to adopt a direct-control interface also. Grim Fandango
from LucasArts is one that uses a context-sensitive camera model, which is rather 
unusual. See the sections “Screen-Oriented Steering” and “Avatar-Oriented 
Steering” in Chapter 8, “User Interfaces.”
MOVEMENT SPEED
No matter what camera model or user interface you choose, you should implement 
both walk and run movement modes so the player can move slowly through unfa-
miliar spaces and quickly through familiar ones. If the game requires the player to 
move repeatedly through areas he already knows well, the player may ﬁ nd 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

566 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
watching the avatar walk deliberately from place to place boring. On the other 
hand, if you offer a rich, detailed world and your game expects the player to exam-
ine everything closely for clues, the user interface must make slow and accurate 
movement possible.
Manipulating Objects
Determining how the player should manipulate objects presents one of the greatest 
challenges of designing an adventure game. The player typically must ﬁ gure out 
what to do with particular objects to solve puzzles and advance the game. In text 
adventures, this amounts to guessing the correct verb. Play often produces inter-
changes that look like this:
> OPEN DOOR
The door is locked, but it looks pretty ﬂ imsy.
> BREAK DOOR
I don’t know how to do that.
> SMASH DOOR
I don’t know how to do that.
> HIT DOOR
I don’t know how to do that.
> KICK DOOR
The door ﬂ ies open.
Sometimes this is fun; a lot of the time it isn’t. In graphic adventure games in 
which the player uses a mouse or a handheld controller, designers no longer face 
this sort of problem but still have to decide how to allow the player to manipulate 
objects. The following sections outline some approaches.
IDENTIFYING ACTIVE OBJECTS
With the advent of 3D-modeled worlds and powerful physics engines, just about 
every object that’s not part of the scenery can, theoretically, be manipulated or 
picked up by the avatar. However, most objects in a scene don’t actually play a role 
in the story; they’re just part of the set decoration. The player needs a way of recog-
nizing the active objects in a particular location. Text adventures used to print a 
list of active objects. Graphic adventures typically use one of four mechanisms:
■ Hunt and click. Active objects don’t look any different from anything else; the 
player simply has to click everything in the scene to see which parts are active. 
This makes the scene look realistic, but the player may ﬁ nd it annoying, especially 
if some active objects are small or partially hidden. Designers have generally aban-
doned this method in favor of the following ones.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ADVENTURE GAMES 
567
 CHAPTER 19
■ Permanently highlighted objects. The active objects in a scene appear perma-
nently highlighted to make them stand out from the background. You can do this 
in a number of ways; for example, make them slightly brighter than the rest of the 
scene or surround them by a line of light or dark pixels. The moment the scene 
appears on the screen, the player can tell which objects are active. It’s convenient, 
if artiﬁ cial. Children’s games often use this method.
■ Dynamically highlighted objects. The active objects in a scene normally look 
like part of the background but appear highlighted when the mouse cursor passes 
over them. You can, for example, change the shape of the mouse cursor, have the 
object light up, or have the object’s name appear momentarily. It still requires the 
player to do some hunting, but hunting is much easier than hunting and clicking; 
a quick wave of the cursor tells the player if there’s an active object nearby.
■ Focus-of-attention highlighting. This mechanism is typically used with hand-
held controllers when the player doesn’t have a cursor. As the avatar moves around, 
the focus of his attention changes depending on the direction he is looking. Whatever 
active object lies directly in front of him commands the focus of his attention and 
appears highlighted. When he turns away, this highlighting disappears. If two active 
objects are close together, however, the player may ﬁ nd it tricky to point the avatar 
in exactly the right direction to put the focus of attention on the desired object.
ONE-BUTTON ACTIONS
In a graphic adventure game played with a handheld controller, designers often 
assign one button of the controller to a generic use or manipulate function. The 
player moves the avatar near the object and presses the use button for obvious 
functions such as opening a door or throwing a switch; the player can always count 
on the button to do the right thing with an object, whatever that might be. Some 
mouse-based games use a similar mechanism, such that clicking an object causes 
the appropriate action. Players ﬁ nd such games easy to play because there’s no 
guessing about what can be done. However, because there can be only one action 
per object, this method doesn’t allow the designer to do as much to challenge the 
player’s lateral thinking.
MENU-DRIVEN ACTIONS
A number of games use a menu to allow the player to select which action to take 
and which object to manipulate (see Figure 19.9). This gives the player a clear pic-
ture of available choices, but the presence of the menu makes the game feel more 
like a software tool and less like a fantasy adventure.
In another variant, right-clicking an object makes a pop-up menu appear, showing 
a series of icons that represent the actions take, use, examine, and possibly others 
(see Figure 19.10). The player left-clicks one of the icons to perform the desired 
action. This mechanism in effect shows the player all the available verbs that can 
be used with that particular object and lets him pick one.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

568 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
FIGURE 19.9 
The action menu in 
The Secret of Monkey 
Island
FIGURE 19.10 
The pop-up menu in 
The Longest Journey
(at right, under tent). 
Note that the icons 
are an eye, a mouth,
and a hand, meaning 
look at, talk to, and 
manipulate.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ADVENTURE GAMES 
569
 CHAPTER 19
MANAGING INVENTORY
Adventure games have always required the player to pick things up and carry them 
around until they’re needed later. Most games present the player with a visible 
inventory mechanism—usually a box that pops up on the screen and shows every-
thing that the avatar is currently carrying. A box with a ﬁ xed size on the screen 
creates a natural limit on the amount a player can carry. When the box is full, she 
can’t put anything else in it unless she takes something out ﬁ rst. It may help to 
give the avatar a natural container in which things can be carried—a backpack, 
saddlebags, or the like—so that the inventory mechanism is a close-up view of the 
container and its contents.
The player will need to stop frequently for inventory management tasks, so you 
should make adding, removing, and viewing inventory items as easy as possible. 
You could choose to devote a part of the screen to the inventory all the time. 
Players ﬁ nd this easy to work with, although it tends to remind the player that she’s 
using a computer, and unless you sacriﬁ ce a lot of screen area or implement a 
scrollbar, the inventory area can’t be very big.
Most designers choose to give the player an inventory mechanism that she can 
open and close on demand. She should be able to do this with a single keystroke or 
button click. The mechanism should not obscure the whole screen—that feels like 
a major mode change and tends to compromise suspension of disbelief. The game 
should allow the player to drag objects into and out of the inventory bag or box 
quickly and efﬁ ciently. The Longest Journey included convenient shortcut keys that 
allowed players to change the object currently being held in the avatar’s hand 
without opening the inventory box. Allowing the player to manage the inventory 
with such shortcut keys also means that you won’t have to create animations of the 
avatar picking up and dropping every possible item in the game. Asheron’s Call, an 
online CRPG, includes pick up and drop animations but doesn’t actually show the 
object in the avatar’s hand.
Most adventure games feature inventories, but not all. Loom, which was designed to 
be especially accessible to people who are not already familiar with adventure games,
doesn’t require the player to keep an inventory. Instead, the player performs all 
actions in the game by spinning musical spells on a distaff, which is the only object
he carries (see Figure 19.11). Although short and considered by die-hard adventur-
ers to be too easy, Loom remains one of the most imaginative and beautifully 
executed adventure games ever created. (Note, too, the clever pun: The game com-
bines the idea of a walking staff, a distaff, and a musical staff in a single object.)
NOTE You can allow 
the avatar to carry 
an unlimited number 
of items just for the 
humor value of it. In 
Haunt, a noncom-
mercial text adventure, 
the player could walk 
through a haunted 
house wearing a 
wetsuit and carrying 
a stereo, an antique 
chair, an oil painting, 
and anything else he 
found.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

