572 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
4. What other characters inhabit the game world? What functions do they serve? 
How do they look and act? How do they respond to the avatar? Can she affect their 
moods and attitudes?
5. How is conversation implemented? What consequences can arise from conversa-
tions? Can the player choose a variety of attitudes in which to speak?
6. What kinds of puzzles does the game offer? What obstacles will the player 
encounter, and what actions will he be able to take to overcome them? Is this a 
pure adventure game or an action-adventure? If it’s an action-adventure, what are 
the action elements like?
7. What graphics technology will be used to display the world? Two-dimensional 
backgrounds? Real-time 3D? How will this affect the look and richness of the 
world?
8. What perspective will the player have on the game setting? Context sensitive? 
First-person? Third-person?
9. What is the user interface for moving the avatar around the game world? Will it 
be point-and-click, direct control, or some other mechanism?
10. How does the player recognize active objects in the world? How does he com-
mand the game to manipulate them? What verbs are available for each object?
11. Is there an inventory, and if so, how is it displayed and used? How does the 
player pick things up and put them down again? Can objects be combined or used 
together? How is this handled?
12. Does the player need a map? If so, will it be static or maintained automatically?
13. Should the game keep a journal to help the player remember things?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 CHAPTER 20
573
Artiﬁ cial Life and 
Puzzle Games
This chapter discusses two game genres that aren’t as fashionable as the ones 
already covered: artiﬁ cial life and puzzle games. That doesn’t mean there’s any-
thing wrong with them; some extremely successful games belong to these genres. 
In fact, because there are fewer games in these categories, the market isn’t crowded 
with look-alike products. If you work in one of these genres, you may have a better 
chance of creating something distinctly new. However, you might have trouble per-
suading a conservative producer that a really good puzzle game is a better bet than 
another ﬁ rst-person shooter.
Because this chapter covers two genres, there isn’t room to explore the elements of 
each one; instead, we’ll just look at the highlights. You’ll study artiﬁ cial life games 
by using The Sims as an example, and then learn a little about genetic life genera-
tors. You’ll also explore the subgenre of god games. The chapter continues with 
puzzle games, deﬁ ning them and summarizing how to create and simplify them
for the computer. 
Artiﬁ cial Life Games
Artiﬁ cial life is a branch of computer science research, just as artiﬁ cial intelligence 
is. Artiﬁ cial life, or A-life as it is sometimes called, involves modeling biological pro-
cesses, often to simulate the life cycles of living things. A-life researchers hope to 
discover new ways of using computers by using biological mechanisms—mutation 
and natural selection, for example—rather than algorithmic ones. In particular, 
A-life is the study of emergent properties, unanticipated qualities or behaviors that 
arise out of the interactions of complex systems. Life itself is considered an emer-
gent property of the planet Earth.
Because they’re intended for entertainment rather than research, commercial A-life 
games implement only a subset of what A-life research investigates. There aren’t any 
commercial A-life games about observing thousands of generations of one-celled 
animals evolving in an environment. Typically, A-life games focus on maintaining 
and growing a manageable population of organisms, each of which is unique.
CHAPTER 20


--- PAGE BREAK ---

574 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
CONWAY’S GAME OF LIFE
John Conway, a mathematician, created Life, an early, simple A-life game. Life depicts 
cellular automata, simulated beings that live on a two-dimensional grid. All these autom-
ata do is survive, reproduce, and die in a series of generations, according to three very 
simple rules:
• Death: If a cell has 0 or 1 neighbor cells, it dies of loneliness. If it has 4 or more neigh-
bors, it dies of overcrowding.
• Survival: If a cell has exactly 2 or 3 neighbor cells, it survives to the next generation.
• Birth: If an empty spot on the grid has exactly 3 neighbor cells, a new cell is born in 
the empty spot in the next generation.
Playing the game consists of setting up an initial conﬁ guration of cells to see what they 
do and trying to create arrangements that grow rather than die out. When people ﬁ rst 
began playing Life, they quickly discovered that it displayed a number of emergent prop-
erties even though it had such simple rules. Certain patterns of cells (called gliders)
could move across the grid, and some (glider guns) could even generate an endless 
stream of new cells.
Artiﬁ cial Pets
Artiﬁ cial pets make up one subcategory of artiﬁ cial life games. These simulated
animals live on your computer (or mobile device), either in an environment of 
their own or on your desktop. They can be simulations of real animals, as in the 
Nintendogs game for the Nintendo DS, or fantasy ones like the Tamagotchi that 
inhabit a tiny and very simple electronic game built into a keychain.
Artiﬁ cial pets are almost always cute. The gameplay concentrates on training, car-
ing for, and watching the creatures do endearing things. They seldom reproduce
or die (although there are exceptions, and sometimes they run away if you ignore 
them or mistreat them), and the player usually wants to interact with only one or 
two at a time. (The section “Genetic A-Life Games,” later in this chapter, discusses 
games about whole populations of organisms in which individuals do reproduce 
and die.)
If the player is going to spend much time looking at an artiﬁ cial pet, then the pet 
needs to have quite a lot of AI: a variety of things that stimulate it and behaviors 
that it exhibits. An artiﬁ cial pet should have a number of emotions or moods that 
manifest themselves through the pet’s behavior. The player should be able to tell, 
by observation, how the pet is feeling and to inﬂ uence its feelings by interacting 
with it in different ways. The animal also needs to interact meaningfully with oth-
ers of its own kind: teasing, playing, grooming, ﬁ ghting, and so on. Above all, it 
needs to be able to learn, so there must be a way for the player to show it how to do 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ARTIFICIAL LIFE AND PUZZLE GAMES 
575
 CHAPTER 20
things. The learning process must not be too long (or the player will get frustrated 
and think his pet is stupid) or too short (or the player will run through everything 
he can teach it very quickly). Tamagotchi are exceptions to this principle, because 
they are very inexpensive and are intended only to provide simple interactions, not 
gameplay. Tamagotchi also showed that players don’t necessarily need rich graphics 
to develop an emotional attachment to an artiﬁ cial pet.
This quality of rich artiﬁ cial intelligence distinguishes artiﬁ cial pets from other 
kinds of A-life, in which individuals have simple rules but the population as a 
whole develops emergent properties. Artiﬁ cial pets, on the other hand, can have 
properties that appear only after they have been around for a while, but typically 
these are preprogrammed and are not truly emergent.
Because an artiﬁ cial pet doesn’t present much of a challenge or impose a victory 
condition (apart from training it to do something speciﬁ c), it’s really a software toy
rather than a game. In Nintendogs, shown in Figure 20.1, you can see two puppies, 
both eating from the same bowl. The game takes advantage of the Nintendo DS’s two 
screens, one of which is touch-sensitive so that you can “pet” your dog. An artiﬁ cial 
pet exhibits a large number of behaviors that the player sees repeatedly and others 
that occur more rarely. Part of balancing such a game—making sure that the player 
doesn’t get bored with it—is making sure that these rare behaviors occur often enough
that the player does get to see them but doesn’t take them for granted.
NOTE Software toy is 
a term coined by Will 
Wright, designer of 
the original SimCity,
for entertainment soft-
ware that you just play 
around with, without 
trying to defeat an 
opponent or achieve 
victory.
FIGURE 20.1
Nintendogs from 
Nintendo


--- PAGE BREAK ---

576 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
The Sims
This section takes an extensive look at The Sims (and its sequels and many mod-
ules), because it is by far the most successful A-life game ever created. It is also 
almost the only game of its kind. There was one game a bit like The Sims called 
Little Computer People many years ago (it ran on the Commodore 64), but it was a 
much simpler game. The Sims is a virtual dollhouse: It simulates a family in a sub-
urban home. You can make the people—each of which is called a sim—move 
around, cause them to complete certain tasks, tell them when to go to bed and 
when to get up, and so on. You can indirectly inﬂ uence their relationships by mak-
ing them talk to each other, but you can’t decide what they will say, and you can’t 
guarantee that they will like each other. Each simulated person comes with his or 
her own personality, likes, and dislikes.
The Sims offers multiple ways to play with it, a major selling point. The game 
includes the features of both an artiﬁ cial pet and a construction and management 
simulation (CMS). Like a CMS, there is an economy: Sims need money to build 
additions to the house and to buy new furniture for it. At least one member of a 
Sim family earns that money by having a job. Players can spend quite a lot of time 
in the buying-and-building mode, if they can afford it. Some players, the particu-
larly goal-oriented ones, really concentrate on this aspect, working hard to 
construct a mansion and ﬁ ll it with luxuries. Others are more interested in the 
interactions and relationships among the sims and spend a lot of the time giving 
them things to do and watching their reactions.
NEEDS
The main challenge of The Sims is to manage this group of slightly incompetent 
people and to improve their career prospects by teaching them things that will 
help them get better jobs. In The Sims 3, each sim has six needs that she must meet 
on an ongoing basis: hunger, hygiene, bladder, energy level, fun, and social interac-
tion (see Figure 20.2). These needs drive her behavior. When a sim feels a need, 
she takes actions to meet it. If the need goes unmet for too long, the sim becomes 
unhappy and can even die (in the case of an unmet hunger need). Each sim has a 
list of things to do to meet her current needs, with the most urgent ones at the top. 
The player can also give the sim orders, in effect inserting a behavior at the top of 
the list. 
The need-based behavior simulation in The Sims is based upon pioneering work by 
the psychologist Abraham Maslow in the 1950s. Maslow organized human needs 
into a hierarchy, with physiological needs (such as oxygen and water) at the bot-
tom, and social and psychological needs (such as love and respect) farther up. The 
lowest-level needs are the most urgent ones, the ones that a person must meet in 
order to stay alive. Other things being equal, a human will try to meet the lower 
needs ﬁ rst, but in practice, needs change over time. Once a person has fulﬁ lled his 
lower-level needs, he can turn to fulﬁ lling his higher-level ones. The Sims uses a 
NOTE The term sim
is usually an abbrevia-
tion of “simulation” 
in the game industry, 
as in “ﬂ ight sim.” 
However, the designers 
of The Sims decided to 
call the simulated peo-
ple in the game sims. You 
can usually tell which is 
meant from context. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ARTIFICIAL LIFE AND PUZZLE GAMES 
577
 CHAPTER 20
similar mechanism. If a sim feels both lonely and hungry, she will seek out food 
before social interaction, because food is a physiological need and more urgent. Once 
the sim has met her most urgent needs (for example, she still feels lonely but no 
longer feels hungry) she will then act to meet her higher-order psychological needs.
You can design such a system fairly easily. You don’t have to use the needs that 
Maslow posited for human beings, or the ones in The Sims. A fantasy creature 
whose behavior is based on an animal such as ants or bees might have a completely 
different hierarchy of needs. It might give the safety of its colony the highest prior-
ity, and self-preservation a lower priority, for example. 
Although the needs-management system is fairly simple, that doesn’t mean that the 
creature’s AI will be easy to implement. The creature still has to have enough intel-
ligence to actually perform the behaviors required to meet its needs. If a sim is hungry 
in The Sims, she must know how to obtain food, and that means knowing which 
appliances in the house can provide it, where they are, and how to operate them.
SKILLS
Unlike artiﬁ cial pets, sims don’t need to be taught by repeatedly showing them 
what the player wants them to learn. Instead, the trick is ﬁ nding the time for them 
to improve their skills, which they can do by a variety of means. The sims in the 
FIGURE 20.2
The Sims 3


--- PAGE BREAK ---

578 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
original game have six skills: cooking, repair, charisma, body (physical strength 
and dexterity), logic, and creativity. These skills inﬂ uence the jobs that they can 
take and, consequently, the amount of money that they can earn. Unfortunately, 
the sims stay so busy and do everything so slowly that often they don’t get enough 
leisure time to study or work out. The game is very much an exercise in time man-
agement. By building up a sim’s skills, the player can make the sim more efﬁ cient, 
which in turn gives the sim more free time and sometimes allows him to earn more 
money. In The Sims 3, the player can choose a lifetime goal for each sim that he cre-
ates and then help the sim achieve it. 
PERSONALITIES
Unlike almost every other computer game, The Sims tries to simulate relationships 
among individual people. These relationships are not terribly sophisticated, but 
they do include such emotions as jealousy, anger, and love. In the ﬁ rst The Sims 
game, ﬁ ve key characterization attributes deﬁ ne each sim’s personality: neat, outgo-
ing, active, playful, and nice. (In The Sims 3, the number of personality traits has 
gone up to 63!) These determine how sims react to one another and whether 
they’re likely to get along. Sims become closer to each other if the player actively 
stimulates interactions by making them talk to each other, give each other gifts, 
and so on. The Sims encourages the player to develop friendships among his sims 
because career advancement depends upon having a certain number of friends.
To construct a mechanism for computing the afﬁ nity between two characters, con-
sider implementing three rules that each character might have, but which apply to 
different attributes:
■ The “I Can’t Stand…” Rule. A character can have an attribute that designates a 
quality that she cannot tolerate in others. For example, if character A can’t stand 
talkative people, and character B has a talkativeness attribute above a given thresh-
old, then A will never make friends with B. Another character might have the same 
rule, but about a different attribute such as cleanliness. (You can even create hypo-
critical characters, if a character dislikes a quality in others that he himself 
possesses!) This rule would override the next two.
■ The Birds of a Feather Rule. Characters with high levels of particular attributes 
are attracted to other characters who have high levels of the same attribute; that is, 
studious people are inclined to be attracted to other studious people. Again, each 
character might apply the rule to a different attribute, so A tends to be friends with 
similarly generous people, while B tends to be friends with similarly spontaneous 
people.
■ The Opposites Attract Rule. Characters with high levels of particular attributes 
are attracted to other characters with low levels of the same attribute, and vice 
versa. For example, a non-musical person might be attracted to a musically talented 
person (perhaps out of respect for a talent that the former lacks).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ARTIFICIAL LIFE AND PUZZLE GAMES 
579
 CHAPTER 20
While the Birds of a Feather and Opposites Attract rules seem to be mutually exclu-
sive, they aren’t if they apply to different attributes. One character might prefer the 
friendship of others who are similarly well organized (the Birds of a Feather Rule, 
applied to organizational ability), but also enjoy the company of people who have 
quite different talents from their own (the Opposites Attract Rule, applied to talent).
THE SUCCESS OF THE SIMS
The Sims likely owes its huge success to two things: the unprecedented scope for 
creativity it offers and its emphasis on interpersonal relationships.
First, it enables the player to exercise his creativity in a familiar sphere: the ordi-
nary suburban home. In addition to building and furnishing a house, players can 
design their own skins for the sims, creating people who look like themselves (or 
anyone else). The game actually offers more creative play than SimCity or SimTower,
for example, because The Sims offers many different kinds of things to do. Players 
can also take photographs of their sims’ houses and store them in albums, along 
with written commentary that the player supplies, effectively creating illustrated 
stories. And they can share all of these things over the Internet. The game offers 
more scope for personal creativity on the part of the player than just about any 
other video game or software toy on the market.
The second reason for the success of The Sims is its focus on human relationships. 
The player’s immediate objective in playing The Sims is to make sure his sims’ phys-
ical needs are met; but his secondary, longer-term objective is to meet the sims’ 
mental or emotional needs: fun, social interaction, and quality living space. The 
sims’ need for social interaction is considerably more complex because it involves 
building relationships with other sims rather than simply interacting with objects, 
and those social interactions produce emergent behaviors that affect their relation-
ships. Players enjoy watching and inﬂ uencing these interactions. In fact, the player’s 
imagination plays a very large role in the game, just as it does in playing with dolls. 
The sims are not terribly complex simulations, but players give them names and 
personalities and ascribe many more characteristics to them than they actually 
possess. The fact that the game is about human relationships rather than abstract 
challenges contributes strongly to its success, especially among female players.
God Games
The term god game refers to games in which the player takes on the role of a god, 
but one with limited powers like the gods of ancient Greece, rather than an all-
powerful god from monotheistic traditions. In a god game, the player’s power 
derives from a population of simulated worshippers—artiﬁ cial characters that the 
player, in his capacity as their deity, must nurture and care for. The population is 
usually depicted as a tribal people rather than a civilization.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

580 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
God games use an omnipresent (of course!) interaction model and an aerial per-
spective. They often share qualities with both construction and management 
simulations and with real-time strategy (RTS) games. (Sometimes games in these 
genres are described as god games, but if a game doesn’t speciﬁ cally refer to the 
player’s role as that of a god, the term is not appropriate. The Civilization games are 
not god games.) As in a CMS like SimCity, the player of a god game exercises only 
indirect control over the population. He can’t tell each speciﬁ c individual what to 
do, as he can in a strategy game. On the other hand, as in an RTS, he competes 
directly against an enemy—in this case, a rival god—who has his own population 
of supporters. And unlike either RTS or CMS games, god games offer the player god-
like powers: controlling the weather, reshaping the landscape, and the ability to 
bestow various blessings (such as fertility) on his own population and various 
curses upon the population of his enemy. God games are a subgenre of artiﬁ cial life 
games because so much of the player’s role involves tending to a population of sim-
ulated people whom he controls only indirectly.
THE ECONOMY OF GOD GAMES
In a god game, the player’s power, usually called mana, grows along with the number 
and prosperity of his worshippers. The size of the population typically inﬂ uences 
two critical values: the maximum amount of mana the player may have and the 
rate at which mana is restored when it is below maximum. Using godly powers con-
sumes mana, and the player spends much of his time using his godly powers for his 
people’s beneﬁ t—ﬂ attening hills to make good farmland, reclaiming land from the 
sea, blessing their crops, and so on. Mana often grows in exponential proportion
to population size, so as the population increases the player acquires vastly
greater powers—a progression that god games share with spellcaster characters in 
role-playing games. However, if his population declines, the maximum amount of 
mana that he may expend declines also, reducing his ability to help them.
The close connection between population size and available mana can easily create 
runaway positive feedback: The more mana the player gets, the more he can do for 
his people, and the more their population grows, the more mana he gets. Positive 
feedback is usually limited by several factors, however. First, his people do not 
reproduce instantaneously, so in spite of the player’s increasing power, he cannot 
force rapid population growth. Furthermore, they often need land in which to 
expand, and creating suitable land consumes mana. Second, the mana cost of using 
his higher-level powers also increases exponentially, so mana growth is balanced 
by increased spending as he exercises his powers. Finally, many of his higher pow-
ers cannot be used to help his own population, but only to do damage to his rival’s 
people. The next section addresses this issue.
GAMEPLAY IN GOD GAMES
The primary challenge in a god game is to produce population growth, but the 
player cannot defeat the rival god simply by helping his own population. He must 
TIP Bullfrog 
Productions, a com-
pany founded by Peter 
Molyneux and subse-
quently purchased by 
Electronic Arts, was 
the most proliﬁ c and 
successful developer 
of god games. To study 
games in this interest-
ing genre, seek out 
Bullfrog’s games such 
as Populous and 
Dungeon Keeper.
Black & White, also 
developed by Molyneux 
at his new company 
Lionhead, is another 
famous god game.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ARTIFICIAL LIFE AND PUZZLE GAMES 
581
 CHAPTER 20
also do damage to the other god’s worshippers, while repairing the damage that the 
rival god does to the player’s people. This damage usually takes the form of harm-
ing his opponent’s population by bringing down natural disasters upon them: 
spectacular events such as ﬂ oods, volcanoes, earthquakes, lightning strikes, torna-
does, plagues, rivers of blood, and so on. Because it’s more fun to watch natural 
disasters than it is to watch crops growing bountifully, god games tend to offer 
more destructive powers the player can use on his enemies than they do construc-
tive ones that beneﬁ t his own people. The mana cost of these events rises rapidly in 
proportion to their destructiveness. In fact, a god game is almost a destruction and 
management simulation.
To design a god game, begin, as always, with the question, What is the player going 
to do?—in this case, as a god. What kinds of powers would you like her to have? 
And what will differentiate your god game from those that have gone before? Also 
ask a lot of questions about the culture of the simulated people. What do they do? 
How do they spend their time? What circumstances are needed for their popula-
tion to grow? How do they react when their world is damaged by a hostile god? A 
god game needs a lot of interesting animations for the people; it is an artiﬁ cial life 
game, after all. Some of the entertainment value of a god game comes (perhaps a 
little cruelly) from watching the people run around and scream in terror as they 
respond to the player’s wreaking destruction upon them.
Genetic A-Life Games
Some A-life games involve managing a population of creatures over time. Rather 
than concentrating so much on individuals, the player tries to achieve certain goals 
with the population as a whole. By far the most successful of these is the Creatures
series from Creature Labs, in which the player manages a small group of beings 
called Norns, creatures who can learn things through repetition. Norns also have 
distinct genetic characteristics that are reﬂ ected in their appearance and behavior. 
Unlike the people in The Sims, Norns have a limited life span, so the game focuses 
on breeding generation after generation of Norns and exploring and manipulating 
their world indirectly through them.
DESIGNING A GENOME
To create a game in which you crossbreed creatures and get new, unique individu-
als, you need to devise a genome: a set of descriptors (genes) that deﬁ ne all the 
important characteristics of the creature. These characteristics should include 
everything about the creature that can vary from individual to individual: shape, 
size, coloration, and so on. You can leave out details common to all creatures. For 
instance, if all your creatures will have two eyes and that will never change, there’s 
no need to store a gene called “number of eyes.”
When two individuals reproduce, they mix their genes, and you will need to deﬁ ne 
how this mixing takes place. It’s a common mistake to think that you 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

582 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
should average the values from the two parents; if you do this, within a very few 
generations, all your creatures will be the same height or very nearly so. Human 
genetics work differently. Humans have not one value for each characteristic, but 
two, one inherited from the mother and one from the father. These two values are 
called alleles. If a person’s two alleles for the same trait don’t match, one of them 
dominates the other according to a rule. The allele for brown eyes dominates the 
recessive allele for blue, so people with one brown allele and one blue allele will 
have brown eyes. When a human reproduces, one of the two alleles is chosen at 
random to go on to the next generation. This means that it’s possible for a brown-
eyed person to still pass on the allele for blue eyes. Otherwise, the allele for blue 
eyes disappears from the population almost immediately.
MUTATION
Mutation is a change to a gene that occurs as a result of some environmental
factor. Radiation famously causes mutations; so do some chemicals. Bear in mind 
that a mutation does not have a lasting effect on the population unless it occurs
in reproductive cells, and even then the results appear only in the offspring of
the individual whose cells mutate. Such mutations may beneﬁ t the population by 
introducing random new values into the gene pool, but they may just as easily be 
detrimental or even lethal to the individuals that inherit them. For the purposes of 
your game, you probably don’t want to allow lethal mutations—those that produce 
miscarriages or stillborn offspring. If your creatures’ gestation period is long, allow-
ing lethal mutations wastes the player’s time and doesn’t add anything of value to 
the gene pool—or the game.
LIFE SPAN, MATURITY, AND NATURAL SELECTION
Each of your creatures needs a natural life span, or your population will explode. 
(In Creatures, the life span of a Norn is about 30 real-time minutes.) If you want 
your population to evolve through natural selection—that is, to become better 
adapted to its environment—then your creatures also need a period of immaturity, 
when they are not fertile, followed by a period of maturity, when they are. Natural 
selection works only if it kills off creatures with maladaptive genes before they 
mature enough to reproduce. If creatures could reproduce immediately after birth, 
maladaptive genes would never leave the gene pool.
If there’s one thing we know about random mutation and natural selection, it’s 
that the effects of these processes appear slowly. The life span of the Norns in 
Creatures is really too long for the player to breed hundreds of generations. If you 
want evolution to be a part of your game, you’ll need to ﬁ nd ways to make it work 
nonrandomly or you‘ll need to keep the life span of your creatures very short. Of 
course, the shorter the life span, the less chance you give each creature to exhibit 
an interesting behavior, so there’s a balance to be struck.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ARTIFICIAL LIFE AND PUZZLE GAMES 
583
 CHAPTER 20
WHAT DOES THE PLAYER DO?
A genetic A-life game might not seem to have much for the player to do except 
wind it up and watch it go. A closer look shows a fair number of ways the player 
can interact with the creatures. She can create completely new individuals and add 
them to the population to observe how their genes inﬂ uence the population. She 
can add and remove environmental hazards that would tend to weed out certain 
genes. She can play with the rate and nature of mutation by adding or modifying 
mutagenic objects or areas of the environment. She can also mate particular indi-
viduals to select particular characteristics (with animals, this is considered useful 
and is called breeding; with people, it is considered evil and is called eugenics).
WHERE DOES SPORE BELONG?
Spore is a ﬁ ve-level game in which the player starts with a customizable “single-celled” 
organism in a 2D world and builds it, in stages, into a civilization of creatures that roam 
the galaxy terraforming planets to make them habitable and ﬁ ghting, or negotiating 
with, other species. The ﬁ rst two stages of the game most closely resemble an artiﬁ cial 
pet, because in those stages the player designs and cares for a single individual. (Even if 
it is killed, it spontaneously regenerates at no cost.) The remaining stages are more like 
RTS games, although the player does not have quite as much direct control as in a pure 
RTS. In these stages, the player interacts with a population of creatures who are 
semiautonomous.
Spore is in fact ﬁ ve games rather than one, with different camera and interaction models 
for each, a different economy, and different victory conditions. As a result, it’s not easy to 
categorize. It’s not a genetic A-life game; despite references to “DNA points” and a cute 
form of sexual reproduction, it does not support natural selection. (Early publicity for the 
game led some biologists to expect a serious simulation of evolution; they were disap-
pointed.) Spore is probably best characterized as a hybrid combination of artiﬁ cial pet 
and RTS, with some god game qualities as well.
Puzzle Games
Puzzles appear in games in several genres. Many single-player computer games con-
tain puzzles; in action games, the player often has to ﬁ gure out the boss opponent’s 
weakness; adventure games are full of puzzles, frequently about obtaining inacces-
sible objects or getting information from other people; even ﬁ rst-person shooters 
offer the occasional puzzle, ﬁ guring out how to get past locked doors and other 
obstacles. Puzzle design is an essential element of game design, and it’s harder than 
you might think.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

584 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
In puzzle games, puzzle solving is the primary activity, though puzzles may occur 
within a storyline or lead up to some larger goal. That doesn’t mean that you can 
offer a random collection of puzzles and call it a game; puzzle games usually pro-
vide related challenges, variations on a theme. The types of puzzles offered include 
recognizing patterns, making logical deductions, or understanding a process. In all 
cases, the puzzles give the player clues that have to be somehow unraveled or solved
to meet the victory condition. Puzzle solving under severe time constraints—as in 
Tetris—belongs more to the action than to the puzzle game genre. Tetris and the 
many games similar to it depend more on physical coordination challenges than 
they do on logic problems.
To be a commercial success, a puzzle game needs to be challenging (but not too 
hard), visually attractive, and above all, enjoyable. It also needs to be fresh and to 
offer enough gameplay to justify the purchase price. Although solitaire card games 
such as FreeCell belong in the class of puzzle games, unless you sell a lot of them 
together as a collection, people are unlikely to want to pay for them.
Scott Kim’s Eight Steps
Scott Kim is a designer who creates puzzles for print media, web sites, and computer 
games. At the 1999 Game Developer’s Conference he gave a lecture entitled “The 
Art of Puzzle Game Design,” in which he identiﬁ ed eight steps in puzzle game 
design (Kim, 1999). The ﬁ rst four steps comprise the process of specifying the rules, 
while the last four comprise the process of building the puzzles and the game itself:
1. Find inspiration. This can come from a variety of sources, including other 
games. Tetris, for example, was inspired by a noncomputer game called Pentominoes.
You can be inspired by a piece of art (the drawings of M. C. Escher have a very
puzzlelike feel), a story, or some particular subject matter. Another source of inspi-
ration is a play dynamic of some kind: ﬂ ipping switches, turning knobs, sliding 
objects around, or picking them up and putting them down. Or there are more 
complex dynamics among objects: balance, reﬂ ection, connection, and 
transmission.
2. Simplify. Suppose you have an idea for a puzzle: efﬁ ciently parking vehicles of 
different sizes in a crowded parking lot so that when someone asks you to retrieve 
his car, you have to move as few other cars as possible. Part of making this task fun 
is simplifying it to its essentials. First, identify the essential tricky core skill (in this 
case, space planning on the ﬂ y) and concentrate on that. Second, eliminate any 
irrelevant details. Don’t make your player worry about crashing the cars, for exam-
ple. Third, make the pieces uniform. Instead of having cars with inﬁ nitely variable 
shapes and sizes, it’s better to have several standard types that conform to a square 
grid. Finally, simplify the controls. Figure out what the essential moves are and 
devise controls that implement them with a minimum of ﬁ ddling.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ARTIFICIAL LIFE AND PUZZLE GAMES 
585
 CHAPTER 20
3. Create a construction set. The only way to be sure that a puzzle concept works 
is to play it, but obviously you don’t want to code up the whole game before you 
know whether it’s fun. You can build a paper prototype or a simple version in 
something like Macromedia Flash to see if it works. The rule designer can play with 
the prototype to tweak the rules, and later the level designer can use it to build lev-
els. You can also code a construction set into the ﬁ nal game so that players can 
build puzzles for each other.
4. Deﬁ ne the rules. This is the key part of puzzle design. Most puzzles are charac-
terized in terms of four things: the board (Is it a grid? A network? Is it irregular? Or 
is there no board at all?), the pieces (How are they shaped? What pictures are on 
them? What other attributes do they have? Where do they come from?), the moves
(What is allowed and what is not? Are they sequential or simultaneous? What side 
effects do they have?), and the goal or victory condition (Does it have to be an 
exact match, or will a partial one do?).
5. Construct the puzzles. A puzzle challenges the player to get from a problem to 
a solution, but of course, the path isn’t simple. Every puzzle requires that the player 
make choices, some of which lead to dead ends. In an adventure game, each puzzle 
appears in a larger context (the story) that gives it meaning, and solving it advances 
the plot somehow. Some puzzle games also offer an overall plot of sorts or won’t let 
you try the next puzzle until you’ve completed the current one. Good puzzles 
require insight from the player, the “Aha!” moment that occurs when the player 
realizes how the puzzle works and how to solve it. But you mustn’t require an 
insight that’s too obscure, or it will feel unfair. If you tell the player that he’s in a 
maze, it’s unfair for the only solution to be to knock down the walls unless you 
indicate somehow that this is possible.
6. Test. Testing tells you several things. It tells you whether the puzzle is too
easy or too hard (this can be difﬁ cult to predict in advance), and it also tells you 
whether it’s fun in the ﬁ rst place. It helps you ﬁ nd out if there are alternative solu-
tions that you didn’t think of, and it helps you discover errors in the rules. And, of 
course, it lets people try out the user interface. Because puzzle actions tend to be 
repetitive, it’s important that the interface be smooth and not frustrating.
7. Devise a sequence. Now it’s time to order all your puzzles into a sequence. The 
most obvious arrangement is a linear or accelerating sequence going from easy to 
difﬁ cult, but in practice, that becomes tiring and discouraging. A better arrange-
ment is a sawtooth shape, which gets difﬁ cult for a while, then goes back to an easy 
puzzle, and so on, over and over. And, of course, you can give the player the free-
dom to play the puzzles out of order or let her earn that right. You also need to 
think about transitions between puzzles, something that will keep her moving on 
to the next one. War games and role-playing games often do this with a storyline. 
Or, the player can be working on a metapuzzle (a single large puzzle, parts of which 
the player solves in between the regular puzzles), which motivates her to complete 
the whole game.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

586 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
8. Pay attention to presentation. Finally, of course, there are all the other details 
of game design: sound, graphical style, animation, user interface elements, story-
line (if any), and so on. If you’re used to designing other kinds of games, it might 
be tempting to move this to an earlier point in the process, but with puzzle games, 
the puzzles are 90 percent of the battle. Get them right ﬁ rst, and the rest won’t be 
nearly as hard.
What Computers Bring to Puzzles
Computers enable us to make a lot of puzzles that would be impossible or expen-
sive to create in the real world—consider the logistics of supplying all the parts in 
The Incredible Machine in physical form, including the mandrills, cats, and goldﬁ sh 
that appear in the game. Even if a puzzle is physically possible, the computer can 
add a number of useful features to make the gameplay easier and more enjoyable.
■ Enable nonphysical or awkward moves. The computer can let players do 
things that don’t correspond to physical actions in the real world—for example, 
changing the color of something. You can also let the player control several things 
at once with just one key, something that would be awkward to do in a physical 
implementation.
■ Include computation features. You can use the computing power available to 
automatically generate new puzzles, ﬁ nd solutions to the current puzzle, or gener-
ate hints about what the player should do next.
■ Enforce the rules. In a lot of physical puzzles, it’s up to the player to enforce the 
rules. Sometimes players make mistakes and break the rules accidentally. A com-
puter game can make sure that never happens.
■ Record player moves and allow the player to undo them. This very useful fea-
ture for games involves moving objects around in a sequence. The solitaire game 
Freecell allows the player to undo one move, but it would be better if he could undo 
as many as he wanted, back to the begining of the game.
■ Structure the experience. The computer allows you to present the experience 
in a particular order, if necessary, passing automatically from one phase to another. 
In the real world, the player would be looking at the instructions and saying, “Let’s 
see, what am I supposed to do next?”
■ Teach. You can include tutorial modes and step-by-step instructions to help 
your player get into the game.
■ Use bells and whistles. Obviously, with sound and animation, you can make a 
puzzle much more aesthetically interesting on the computer than it would be as a 
physical object.
■ Enable online play. The computer lets players compete against one another, 
compare solutions, and be part of a puzzle-solving community.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ARTIFICIAL LIFE AND PUZZLE GAMES 
587
 CHAPTER 20
THE INCREDIBLE MACHINE
The Incredible Machine furnishes an excellent example of an imaginative and clever puz-
zle game that sold well. In fact, it’s not just a game but a whole game franchise with ﬁ ve 
editions so far. The current version, Return of the Incredible Machine: Contraptions, is 
published by Sierra Entertainment (formerly Sierra On-Line).
The game consists of a series of puzzles, each of which involves building a crazy machine 
to accomplish a certain task. The player constructs each machine in a two-dimensional 
space upon which a variety of mechanical devices can be placed. (Some of these devices 
are actually animals, which can be frightened by noises or lured by food.) Each puzzle 
starts with a few objects in given positions, and the victory condition states what the 
player must accomplish (for example, pop the balloon) using a limited number of addi-
tional devices. The player must place these devices and hook them together in such a 
way that the resulting machine, when set in motion, achieves the goal. Playing the game 
consists of adding elements to the machine, trying them out, adjusting them, trying them 
again, and so on. Figure 20.3 shows one of the scenarios in The Incredible Machine. The 
goal is given at the left. Available parts are in the area beneath the main workspace.
FIGURE 20.3 The Incredible Machine
continues on next page


--- PAGE BREAK ---

588 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
THE INCREDIBLE MACHINE
continued
Scott Kim identiﬁ es three key design decisions that he feels make The Incredible Machine
the prototypical construction puzzle game.
• Allow the player to build things. This makes The Incredible Machine a construction 
game and differentiates it from, say, Tetris (an action puzzle game) or Marble Drop (a 
logic game in which the player decides where and when to drop marbles into a mech-
anism). The player is exercising his creativity.
• Include no real-time decision-making. Constructing the machine and running it take 
place in separate modes. The player can take as long as he wants to think about what 
he’s doing. This is in contrast with Lemmings, an excellent game but one that requires 
the player to solve its puzzles on the ﬂ y. Often if the player doesn’t solve the puzzle in 
time, he has to start over.
• Allow players to design their own puzzles. Any time players can build their own ele-
ments, it adds value to the game and helps create a community of devoted fans. 
Players can exchange their puzzles by e-mail, post them on web sites, run tourna-
ments, and enjoy all kinds of other activities, all of which constitute free publicity for 
the game.
Checking the Victory Condition
Bear in mind that players don’t always ﬁ nd the solution to a puzzle the way that 
you envisioned when you invented it. There might be more than one path to the 
goal. When your game checks to see whether the player solved the puzzle, you 
should test only to see whether the player met the victory condition you gave her, 
not that she has done it in the way you expected. Otherwise, you’ve cheated her, 
and she’ll be justiﬁ ably frustrated. She’s managed to get to the correct solution 
state, but your game refuses to recognize it.
This problem appears in the game Interstate ’76, which, while not a puzzle game, 
does offer a level containing a puzzle of sorts. The player drives an armed and 
armored car in an area enclosed by a concrete wall, and the victory condition for 
winning the level states that (among other things) the vehicle must escape the 
enclosed area. The game’s designers put in a hidden ramp, which they wanted play-
ers to ﬁ nd and use to drive out of the area. However, players discovered another 
way to get out: If a player drops a land mine near the wall and then drives toward it 
at full speed, the force of the explosion lifts the car high enough to clear the wall, 
and the car ﬂ ies over it and out. Unfortunately, the software doesn’t test for the 
solution state that the player is given: Is the car outside the wall? Instead, it tests to 
see if the player uses the ramp. If a player escapes without using the ramp, the game 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

