590 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ What forms of interaction did the player have in the simulation? Did you per-
ceive the player interactions as fun? If not, why not?
■ If the product did not involve the life cycle of a life form, what forms of interac-
tion did the player have in the simulation? Did you perceive the player interactions 
as fun? If not, why not?
■ Brieﬂ y document the interface for the game. How does the player interact with 
the world, in a direct or indirect manner? How well does the interface allow the 
player to interact, or does the interface inhibit or limit interaction?
■ Address the game progression: Did the game change over time? How did the 
player interactions affect the life form(s)?
Choose a puzzle game that you believe, from your own experience of playing it, is 
an excellent example of the genre (or use one your instructor assigns). It should be 
a solitaire (single-player) game where puzzle solving is the primary activity. Write a 
report documenting this simulation. Be sure to cover at least the following areas:
■ Describe the gameplay and game mechanics. Describe the presentation of the 
game and interaction of the player.
■ If the game has a physical representation in the real world (solitaire card games, 
for example), what does the computer bring to the video game version? What rules 
or designs were changed for the new medium?
■ Does the game have levels or increased difﬁ culty? Is it clear to the player how 
the game progression works? In your opinion, does the game ramp up too quickly 
or not quickly enough?
■ Address the combination of puzzles: Is there more than one type of puzzle in 
the game? Is the mechanism that is used to combine the puzzles into a single game 
clear to the player and does it make sense?
■ Discuss whether the victory condition for any level or the overall game is clear 
to the player.
In your report, use screen shots to illustrate your points. End the case study with 
suggestions for improvement or, if you feel the game cannot be improved, sugges-
tions for additional features that might be fun to have in the game.
Alternatively, choose an A-life or puzzle game that you believe is particularly bad.
Do the same case study, explaining what is wrong and how it could be improved.
A case study is neither a review nor a design document; it is an analysis. You are 
not attempting to reverse-engineer the entire game but simply to explain how it 
works in a general way. Your instructor will tell you the desired scope of the assign-
ment; I recommend from ﬁ ve to twenty pages.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 CHAPTER 21
591
Online Gaming
Online gaming has grown from a tiny fraction of the interactive entertainment 
business into a major market in its own right. In this chapter, you’ll learn about 
some of the features and design challenges that set online gaming apart from the 
more traditional single-player or multiplayer local games. Online gaming is a tech-
nology rather than a genre, a mechanism for connecting players together rather 
than a particular pattern of gameplay. Therefore, this chapter doesn’t look for 
design commonalities as the chapters on game genres did. Instead, it addresses 
some of the design considerations peculiar to online games no matter what genre 
those games belong to. It’s a huge topic, however, and there is only room in this 
book for the highlights.
Don’t confuse online gaming, as this book uses the term, with online gambling
or online casino gaming. Online gambling is a different industry, and is not
covered here.
The second half of the chapter is devoted to online games that are persistent worlds,
also known as massively multiplayer online games, or MMOGs. Raph Koster, lead 
designer of both Ultima Online and Star Wars Galaxies, and Tess Snider, lead program-
mer at Trion World Network, provided a great deal of assistance with this material.
What Are Online Games?
This chapter uses the term online games to refer to multiplayer distributed games in 
which the players’ machines are connected by a network. (This is as opposed to 
multiplayer local games in which all the players play on one machine and look at 
the same screen.) While online games can, in principle, include solitaire games that 
happen to be provided via the Internet, such as Bejeweled, the online aspect of soli-
taire games is incidental rather than essential to the experience. Bejeweled is simply 
a puzzle game. Online games do not need to be distributed over the Internet; games 
played over a local area network (LAN) also qualify as online games.
Advantages of Online Games
Some features of online games offer advantages to us as game developers, and some 
offer advantages to players, attracting people who might not otherwise play com-
puter games.
CHAPTER 21


--- PAGE BREAK ---

592 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Player Socializing
Online games offer opportunities for social interaction. The social aspect enhances 
the players’ enjoyment of the experience. Girls and women have traditionally 
shown less interest in interactive entertainment, especially games for personal com-
puters, in part because these tend to offer solitary activity. Women represent a 
much greater proportion of the online game market than they do the single-player 
game market, partially because they enjoy interacting with others.
At the moment, most games offer only limited social interaction with conversation 
restricted to typing text (chatting), which is awkward while you are trying to play a 
fast-paced game, but more and more games include voice communication. When 
enough people get broadband access, online games could include video as well. A 
time might come when we see players dressing appropriately for their roles in the 
game so that they’ll look cool on camera.
As the creator of such an online game, you’re more than just a game designer; you 
must also be a social architect. This is actually your toughest challenge, far more 
difﬁ cult than designing the core mechanics of a single-player game. An online game
isn’t an experience that you lead a player through; it’s a petri dish for growing social
situations, and it’s nearly impossible to predict in advance what will happen there. 
Human Intelligence Instead of Artiﬁ cial Intelligence
In single-player games, the player competes against the computer, so the computer 
has to have enough artiﬁ cial intelligence (AI) to be a good opponent; building the 
AI for a complex game presents a huge programming task and one that is difﬁ cult 
to get right. But if the players compete against each other, as they do in most online
games, you don’t usually need as much AI. The players provide all the intelligence 
required in many situations.
You can use AI in an online game if you want to: You might include nonplayer 
characters (NPCs) who need to behave intelligently, or you might design a game in 
which all the players play cooperatively against artiﬁ cial opponents. Several popular
games have limited NPCs but have some large opponents that the online players 
must work together to combat. Guild Wars, for example, encourages this type of play.
The AI-controlled enemies are challenging to beat with a team of online friends and
impossible for an individual. But many online games rely on their players to provide
most of the intelligence in the game, and this can make the game easier to develop 
in that respect. A real-time strategy game, for example, still needs AI for its individ-
ual units when played online, but players supply the strategic and tactical thinking.
Online Gameplay Versus Local Multiplayer Gameplay
Multiplayer gameplay, whether online or local, offers great ﬂ exibility to the game 
designer, allowing purely competitive (everyone for himself), purely cooperative 
NOTE  For further 
discussion of this
topic, please read
the excellent and
insightful Community
Building on the
Web by Amy Jo Kim
(Kim, 2000).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ONLINE GAMING 
593
 CHAPTER 21
(us against the machine), or team-based (us versus them) play. In online play, a net-
work links the players, who occupy (generally, but not necessarily) separate locations.
Local play can be broken into two categories: LAN play or physically local play. LAN
play is virtually identical to online play except that Internet access is not required—
a technical distinction that has little or no impact on game design. In physically 
local play (hereafter referred to simply as local play), all the players sit in the same 
room, playing the game on the same machine and, most important, looking at the 
same screen.
For the last 30 years, local play has been the standard mode of interaction for mul-
tiplayer console games: Each player holds a controller, and all players look at the 
TV. This may change now that the new generation of consoles has network capabil-
ity, but local play is likely to remain the most common way people use multiplayer 
games because it incurs no network charges and lets friends play together in groups. 
PROBLEMS WITH LOCAL PLAY
Local play as just described presents the game designer with serious difﬁ culties. For 
one thing, because all the players share the same TV, any user interface elements 
displayed must be duplicated for each player, taking up valuable screen space. If the 
game maintains a separate point of view for each player, you must subdivide the 
screen into little windows. Each player will ﬁ nd it harder to see a small individual 
window than the full screen image, and activity in the other players’ windows will 
distract him.
More important, however, because local play uses a single display device, you have 
no way to hide information. Each player can see everything the others do. This 
works well for ﬁ ghting games, but not as well for any game in which players might 
want to keep their activities secret—war games, for instance.
Finally, local play necessarily imposes limits on the number of people who can par-
ticipate at one time. Consoles seldom support more than four players; PCs support 
even fewer. Even if you could add players indeﬁ nitely, the screen would become 
crowded with characters and other data, and the machine itself would bog down
as the computing tasks grew.
BENEFITS OF NETWORKED PLAY
Online gaming solves all these problems. Each player uses her own screen, and the 
entire display supports only her gaming experience. The game can present her with 
her own unique perspective, including exactly as much information as the designer 
wants her to have and no more. And online games can support large numbers of 
people (although games requiring a central server may ﬁ nd the server capacity lim-
iting); it’s not uncommon for some games to support tens of thousands of players 
online at a time. With an online game, players can always ﬁ nd other people to play 
with at any hour of the day or night.
NOTE The Nintendo 
GameCube is unusual: 
It allows players to 
plug in a Game Boy 
Advance and use it 
as a controller. The 
designer may take 
advantage of the Game 
Boy’s screen to display 
secret information 
only to the player who 
should see it. The 
wireless connectivity 
of the Nintendo DS 
also allows multiplayer 
local play in which 
each player has his 
own screen.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

594 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Disadvantages of Online Games
Playing games over a network, especially the Internet, presents the designer with 
certain disadvantages, as well. This section discusses some of these technical chal-
lenges, as well as the ongoing responsibilities of providing new content and customer
service. You should also be aware that strangers playing your game anonymously 
over a network can cause social friction and that this can range from minor misbe-
havior to serious criminal offenses.
Technical Issues
Although this is a book about game design rather than programming, you need to 
be aware of certain technical issues for online games that local games don’t have
to address. This section doesn’t go into them in great detail, but aims to make you 
familiar with these technical considerations. If you design an online game you will 
need to discuss them with your programming team.
COMMUNICATION MODELS
Your programming team will need to choose a communication model from the two 
currently in use in networked gaming. In the ﬁ rst, client/server, each player runs a 
program, called the client, on his computer, that communicates with a central program,
the server, on a computer owned by a company providing the game service. In the 
client/server model, the server runs the game engine, sending packets of information
to the various clients, and the clients merely present that information to the players. 
The other model, peer-to-peer, involves direct communication between the players’ 
computers. Implementation of peer-to-peer (sometimes abbreviated P2P) communi-
cation is quite straightforward for two-player games but becomes more complicated 
as more players are involved. The players’ systems must decide which machine to 
designate as the host—that is, which will control the game while the others become 
guests. If the host logs out of the network, one of the guests’ computers must take 
over and become the new host—preferably automatically and without anyone’s 
noticing (this is known as automated host migration, a feature already supplied by 
Microsoft’s DirectPlay facilities). Some companies also operate matchmaking ser-
vices in which the company’s server functions only to allow players to ﬁ nd one 
another and connect together in peer-to-peer networks. All of this is programming 
work that ofﬂ ine games don’t have to bother with.
LATENCY
The Internet is designed for redundancy rather than speed, so it doesn’t make any 
guarantees about how long a given packet of data will take to get from one point to 
another. This phenomenon is called latency. In many games, a faster connection 
translates into a gaming advantage, making players with high-speed connections 
more likely to win the game. You can design around this by making your game 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ONLINE GAMING 
595
 CHAPTER 21
turn-based or trying to match up opponents on the basis of their connection 
speeds. At the moment, there is no one satisfactory answer.
DROPPED AND GARBLED PACKETS
What happens to your game if it doesn’t get some of the information it needs 
because of a glitch in the network? Your system will require a mechanism for 
detecting a missing packet or one containing bad data, and requesting that the 
packet be resent from the server or host. Packets can also arrive out of order, which 
can cause confusion if your client receives information that a race car is about to 
cross the ﬁ nish line, but the next packet indicates that the car is 100 yards back on 
the track instead. Every packet must have a unique serial number, in sequence, so 
that you can tell if one is missing or if packets are arriving in the wrong order. 
Fortunately, middleware companies are starting to offer software packages to help 
manage this problem.
It’s Harder to Suspend Disbelief
For some players, gaming is a form of escapism that takes them away to a magical 
place, and they want it to stay magical while they’re there. To them, it’s particularly 
important that nothing occur in the game to break their suspension of disbelief, 
but in online games there will always be players who won’t stay in character or who 
will talk about real-world issues and events while they’re in the game. Unless 
there’s a strong (and enforced) ethos of in-character role-playing, people who play 
in an online game have to accept that their imaginary world includes a lot of 
entirely real people.
The persistent world World of Warcraft offers players multiple versions of its game 
world with different versions imposing different rules on the player. In some ver-
sions, in-character role-playing is expected—although there is no real mechanism 
to enforce it.
Misbehavior
Unfortunately, playing with strangers—particularly anonymous strangers—creates 
opportunities for a variety of types of misbehavior that can ruin the game for oth-
ers. These range from simple rudeness to harassment, cheating in various forms, 
and outright fraud. Rudeness might not sound very serious, but it drives away other 
customers. Furthermore, if you want children to play your game, it is particularly 
important to make sure you offer a safe environment—you may even have a legal 
obligation to make sure adults don’t use your game environment to abuse chil-
dren—and that means hiring customer service people to monitor the players. 
Self-contained networks such as America Online have some tools at their disposal 
to manage these problems, but on open networks such as the Internet, it’s much 
harder. The section “Design Issues for Online Gaming” later in this chapter 
addresses some of these issues.
NOTE Raph Koster 
said, only partly jok-
ing, that the sole rule 
in Star Wars Galax-
ies is, “Any behavior 
that hurts business is 
bad behavior.”


--- PAGE BREAK ---

596 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
The Need to Produce Content
When you’re building a single-player game to be sold in retail stores, your job gen-
erally ﬁ nishes when the gold master disc goes off to manufacturing. The players 
buy the game and you can go off to work on another project.
Online games don’t work this way; they earn money either through advertising rev-
enue, micropayments, or subscriptions. To keep people interested, you have to 
change things, and that means producing new content on an ongoing basis. This is 
expensive for the service provider and ties up skilled development staff. The prob-
lem is most obvious with persistent worlds, but even simple games need to be kept 
fresh. Maﬁ a Wars, a popular browser game available via the Facebook social net-
working web site, does not use 3D graphical environments or sounds, but the 
developers regularly add new gear for players to buy and things for them to do.
Customer Service
All game companies require customer service staff to help players with problems, 
but online games need far, far more of them. With ofﬂ ine games, players mostly 
need help with technical difﬁ culties; for gameplay problems, they can buy strategy 
guides or ﬁ nd hints on the Internet. But in a live, online environment, players 
expect to get help immediately, and they demand help for a much larger range of 
issues than they do in ofﬂ ine games. Players expect customer service people not 
only to solve technical problems but also to explain the user interface, answer ques-
tions about game content, and enforce justice by investigating and punishing 
misbehavior by other players. With thousands of players logged on at any one time, 
providing these services can become very expensive.
Design Issues for Online Gaming
This section addresses some design issues peculiar to online games: the problems 
presented by players arriving or disappearing during play, the pros and cons of real-
time versus turn-based play, things to consider when providing a chat feature, and 
a variety of issues regarding security and the prevention of cheating.
Arriving Players
Players can log on wanting to play your game at any time, and the game must be 
capable of dealing with them intelligently. In most noncomputer games, all the 
players must be present at the beginning of the match or it won’t be fair. In Monopoly,
for example, anyone who entered the game late would be at a signiﬁ cant disadvan-
tage—the others would have already grabbed the best properties, and the game’s 
built-in inﬂ ation would swiftly bankrupt newcomers.
The usual solution for this problem is to start new matches at frequent intervals 
and to have a waiting area, or lounge, where the players can hang around while they 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ONLINE GAMING 
597
 CHAPTER 21
wait for a new match to begin. In a game that can be played with any number of 
players, such as bingo, you can simply start a new match, say, every three minutes, 
and whoever is waiting may play. In games requiring a ﬁ xed number of players, 
such as bridge, you will need to establish a matchmaking service that allows them 
to form groups and to wait (more or less patiently) for enough players to join a par-
ticular group; the game begins as soon as the required number of players arrives. 
The number of players needed for a game should be small, however, to minimize 
waiting times. Any game that requires more than about eight players risks alienat-
ing players who do not want to wait.
In some games, players can join almost immediately without any disadvantage—
poker, for instance. Each hand takes little time, and new players can join at the
end of the current hand. Tournament play, of course, has a deﬁ nite start, and play-
ers cannot join after the game begins. For games of indeﬁ nite duration, such as 
persistent worlds, you can’t do anything about the fact that some players possess 
advantages other players don’t. The players who began the earliest and who devote 
the most time to play will always have an advantage (unless you allow players to 
purchase prebuilt characters for real money on eBay, but that just shifts the advan-
tage from players who have the most time to players who have the most money). 
You can, however, prevent those advantages from spoiling the game for other players:
■ Get rid of the victory condition. Without winners and losers, an online enter-
tainment ceases to be a game per se and becomes a different kind of amusement. 
The player focuses on her own achievements rather than on defeating all the other 
players. In this case, the old cliché becomes apt: It’s not whether you win or lose, 
but how you play the game. Persistent worlds, which are addressed later in the 
chapter, work on that basis.
■ Discourage competition between experienced players and newcomers. You 
can measure the progress of your players and see to it that only those who are fairly 
matched come into direct conﬂ ict. Tournament chess uses a ranking system to do 
just that. A highly ranked player who beats a newcomer gets little or no reward for it. 
Maﬁ a Wars only permits players with similar levels of experience to ﬁ ght each other.
■ Be sure that direct competition is consensual. If experienced players do get the 
chance to compete directly with newcomers, you should give the newcomers the 
option to refuse to play. No one should be forced to take part in an unfair competition.
Disappearing Players
Just as players can appear at any time, they can log off at any time, or lose their 
connection to the game for technical reasons. If possible, your game should deal 
with this neatly and with minimal disruption to other players. In many games, 
such as racing games, players compete against one another in a free-for-all. If one 
player disappears, it doesn’t make that much difference—his car vanishes from the 
track, and that’s all. In effect, the player forfeits the race and the others continue. 
On the other hand, if the game requires players to work in teams, the disappear-
ance of one player could put his team at a serious disadvantage. In games that 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

598
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
require a ﬁ xed number of participants, your only options are to give the person a 
chance to reconnect, assuming the disappearance was a mistake, to include an AI 
element that can take over for the missing player, or to shut down the game.
Tournaments require special consideration. If players compete to get the best win-
loss ratio, one might deliberately choose to log out rather than lose the game—
which can deny the other person victory. Should the vanishing player be forced
to forfeit? What if the disconnection was an accident, caused by a bad line? 
Unfortunately, there’s no sure way to tell if it was.
You may ﬁ nd that one of the following suggestions solves the problem of vanishing 
players for your game:
■ The vanishing player forfeits the game. This solution may unfairly penalize 
players who are disconnected by accident. It’s only a good solution if the network 
connections are extremely reliable, such as a local area network. If the players run 
the risk of being disconnected accidentally and you are offering something valu-
able to the winner (such as a cash prize in a tournament), then you should not 
require vanishing players to forfeit the game. Online gambling games do not 
require the player to forfeit; they implement mechanisms for allowing a player to 
restart a game in the event of a disconnection.
■ Institute a penalty for disconnections that is less severe than forfeiture. If a 
player disconnects in the middle of combat during an EverQuest session, the avatar 
remains in the game for a minute, taking additional damage. Unfortunately, the 
avatar doesn’t ﬁ ght very well by itself. On the MSN network, players who get dis-
connected once have 10 minutes to reconnect and resume the game; if they fail to 
do so, they forfeit or, in some games, an artiﬁ cial player managed by the server 
takes over for them. If they get disconnected twice, they forfeit automatically. In 
many games, the game tries to reconnect to the player for a limited amount of 
time. In a turn-based game, such as poker, this has a minimal impact on the other 
players who have to wait for their turn anyway. Ultimately, the player is assumed to 
be away from his computer, and play continues without him until he reconnects.
■ Award victory to whomever is ahead in the game at the time of the discon-
nection. This solution seems fair but means that the moment someone goes ahead, 
she can disconnect to deny her opponent a chance to catch up. Again, you should 
consider this only in circumstances in which it is difﬁ cult or impossible to discon-
nect intentionally.
■ Record it as a tie. While this solution might motivate a losing player to discon-
nect intentionally, it still makes a fairly neutral solution.
■ Record it as a “disconnected game.” You then have to decide exactly what this 
means in the context of a tournament. If other players can view the records, they 
can tell when someone racks up a suspiciously high number of disconnections and 
avoid playing with that person. Or the server can determine that a player is being 
disconnected too often and prevent him from playing for a period of time.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ONLINE GAMING 
599
 CHAPTER 21
■ Abandon the game entirely. This is the fairest solution in the case of accidental 
disconnections, but it is unfair to whomever is leading if the player who is behind 
pulls the plug.
■ Use referees. The World Cyber Games, a large gaming tournament, keeps a log 
ﬁ le during play, and in the event of disconnection, a referee can examine the ﬁ le to 
adjudicate victory. If the players agree, they can also restart the match. This requires 
a human referee to be available, however, which adds to the operating costs.
There’s no one right answer to this problem; it depends too much on the nature of 
the individual game. It’s up to you as the designer to think about the problem and 
try to decide what’s fair.
Real-Time Versus Turn-Based Games
Many online games take place in real time with each player acting simultaneously. 
This offers players maximum freedom; they always have something to do and can 
order their activities any way they like. It’s also more immersive than turn-based 
gaming. Waiting your turn while other players act harms suspension of disbelief. 
Unfortunately, real-time gaming tends to make a strategy game into an action 
game. Whichever player moves his pieces fastest has the advantage. In games such 
as Command & Conquer, victory becomes a matter of establishing an efﬁ cient weap-
ons-production system as quickly as possible.
Turn-based games seem rather old-fashioned nowadays, but there is still a demand 
for them. Many simpler online games are automated versions of noncomputerized 
card games and the like, and they still require players to take turns. For this to work 
smoothly, you must include certain features:
■ Limit the number of players in one game. Four or ﬁ ve is a good maximum. 
With more than this, players will have to wait too long between turns and will 
grow impatient.
■ Set a time limit on the length of a player’s turn. A slow player or one who has 
left to answer the phone mustn’t be allowed to hold up the game. Both the player 
whose turn it is and all the other players should be able to see a countdown timer. 
The length of time will naturally vary depending on the sort of game; for a card 
game such as hearts, 10 seconds should be plenty.
■ Determine a reasonable default action if the player runs out of time. In 
games in which it’s possible to pass, the best default might simply be to pass with-
out acting, but in a game such as checkers, in which a move is required, the game 
will have to choose a move. It doesn’t have to be a very smart move, however. It’s 
up to the player to supply the intelligence; if he doesn’t, it’s his own fault.
■ Let players do other things while waiting for their turn. They should deﬁ -
nitely be allowed to chat with one another, study the battleﬁ eld, organize their 
units, or do anything else that doesn’t actually inﬂ uence the gameplay.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

600 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
A few games, such as Age of Wonders II or Civilization IV, allow all the players to take 
their turns simultaneously—that is, they each choose their next move at the same 
time, without knowing what the others are doing. Once they have all chosen (or a 
timer runs out), the turn ends, and the computer processes and displays the results 
of all of the moves.
Note that some turn-based games permit very long turns in which players make 
only one move every 24 hours or exchange their moves by e-mail. This can allow 
novices to compete against more advanced players. However, such games are rare. 
This chapter is concerned with players who are online in real time, even if the 
game itself is turn-based.
Chat
Every multiplayer game for machines that use keyboards should include a chat
feature—a mechanism that enables players to send messages to one another. Voice 
chat, implemented with microphones, is now a common feature of online console 
games and many PC games as well. Depending on the nature of the game, players 
should be able to send private messages to one other individual, messages only to 
members of their own team (if any), or general broadcast messages to all other play-
ers who might reasonably be interested. In a game played by thousands of players, 
any one player should be able to broadcast messages only to those in his vicinity or 
on his team, whatever that might mean in the context of the game—the players at 
his table, the players in the same room of a dungeon, and so on.
Unfortunately, chat brings a new set of problems: the potential for rude, abusive, or 
harassing behavior. People who pay to play your game expect that others will meet 
certain minimum standards of civility. This is particularly important for games that
will be played by children; parents rightfully want to protect their kids from abusive
or offensive behavior. In a sporting event, the referee enforces rules that maintain 
these standards, or if there is no referee, then the collective authority of the other 
players must sufﬁ ce. Online, it’s much more difﬁ cult to police players’ behavior.
LIMITED CONTENT
The surest solution is to restrict what players may say to each other. Mario Kart for 
the Nintendo Wii offers no voice chat and only allows players to choose remarks 
from a ﬁ xed list of phrases. This guarantees that they can’t say anything offensive, 
but it doesn’t really meet the social need that chat supplies.
PROFANITY FILTERS
Designers have tried profanity ﬁ lters, but they aren’t fully reliable, and they sometimes
produce laughable results. Words such as damn and hell are perfectly legitimate when
talking about religion, even if they’re considered swearing in another context—
and don’t think that people won’t talk about religion when they’re in your dungeon;
they’ll talk about everything under the sun. In any case, people can easily get around


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ONLINE GAMING 
601
 CHAPTER 21
such ﬁ lters by misspelling the words (and of course, profanity ﬁ lters don’t solve the 
problem for voice chat). A profanity ﬁ lter should always be backed up by other 
means, such as online customer service representatives to whom players can report 
bad behavior.
COMPLAINT AND WARNING SYSTEMS
Some chat systems include complaint mechanisms designed to discourage online 
rudeness. Some online games give players a Report button they can push whenever 
they receive an offensive message. The offending message is, if it consists of text, 
automatically forwarded to someone in authority (usually online customer service 
staff), who can then investigate and take appropriate action: warn the offender to 
mend his ways, kick him ofﬂ ine, or even ban his account.
The America Online Instant Messenger includes a fully automated system that 
allows users to warn each other, either anonymously or openly, when one partici-
pant behaves badly. A user can be warned once per message that he sends; the more 
warnings he receives, the less frequently the system permits him to send messages. 
If he receives enough complaints, he may be unable to send any further messages 
for several hours. The record of the complaints is deleted over time, so a user’s bad 
behavior is not held against him permanently. If he has behaved himself for a 
while, he can resume sending messages.
IGNORING OTHER PLAYERS
Some chat mechanisms allow a player to hide messages from other individuals whose
behavior they ﬁ nd offensive, a practice called ignoring. The player simply selects the 
name of a person he wants to ignore, and he no longer receives chat messages from 
that person, no matter what the person writes. You can permit this to take place 
silently (the other player doesn’t know she’s being ignored) or automatically send a 
message telling her that she has been ignored—the online equivalent of deliber-
ately turning your back on someone. This mechanism is both effective—the users 
have full control over whom they hear from and whom they don’t—and inexpen-
sive because it doesn’t require staff intervention. You should also include the ability 
to turn chat off entirely if players simply don’t want to hear from anyone else.
MODERATED CHAT SPACES
The most effective, but also the most expensive, way of keeping order in a chat space 
is to give one person authority to discipline the others at all times. Internet Relay Chat 
uses this method; the creator of a chat room exercises the authority to kick people out.
If the enforcer also participates in the game, this method is subject to abuse. When 
people set up their own online matches among their friends, you can let them police 
themselves; but when they are paying someone to arrange the game for them (as in a 
match making service or persistent world), the moderator must be an impartial rep-
resentative of the game’s provider—a customer service agent, in effect, whether 
paid or unpaid.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

602 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Collusion
Collusion is a form of cheating in which players who are supposed to be opponents 
work together in violation of the rules. The rules of Monopoly explicitly prohibit col-
lusion. The fact that the players are all in the same room, and usually have social 
obligations to one another, tends to enforce that rule. Unfortunately, you can’t 
count on those factors in an online game. Some players will join a game with a 
deliberate, even avowed, intent to cheat. Because they’re playing with strangers, 
they have no social relationship at stake, and because they’re physically miles 
apart, no one can see them do it. 
EXAMPLES OF COLLUSION
Computer games seldom have written rules because the designers assume that the 
game will enforce the rules automatically: The players simply can’t make illegal 
moves, in most cases. However, software can’t detect certain kinds of collusion 
between players.
Consider an online multiple-choice trivia game with three possible answers for 
each question. Each player receives the same question from the server and has a 
ﬁ xed length of time in which to enter an answer. When a player enters his answer, 
he immediately learns whether he was right or wrong. Correct answers earn points, 
and the player with the largest number of points at the end of the game wins.
Four players can easily collude at this game to guarantee that one of them will win. 
They all play on different machines in the same physical location—an Internet 
café, for instance. When a question appears, three of the players each immediately 
enter a different response—A, B, or C—and the fourth one waits. When the soft-
ware informs one of three players that she is correct, she immediately calls out her 
letter, and the fourth player enters it before the time runs out. This way the fourth 
player always enters the correct answer. Even with fewer than four players collud-
ing this way, they can greatly increase the odds of winning.
You can easily defeat this form of collusion: You simply don’t reveal the correct 
answer until the time for entering answers runs out. Players who enter an answer 
early simply have to wait to ﬁ nd out whether they answered correctly. But other 
forms of collusion can be more insidious. Online poker, for example, can involve 
players sharing information about their cards via instant messaging or some form of 
physical communication. There is no way for the system to account for external means 
of communication. If you offer a prize for the player who wins the greatest number 
of chess games in a certain length of time, for example, two players can collude to 
play each other, with one always trying to lose to the other as quickly as possible.
DESIGNING TO REDUCE COLLUSION
The designer of an online game must try to anticipate collusion as much as possi-
ble. Unfortunately, experience shows this to be extremely difﬁ cult. There are no 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ONLINE GAMING 
603
 CHAPTER 21
limits on players’ ingenuity or the lengths to which some will go. Even if your 
game doesn’t offer a chat feature, players can play from two machines in the same 
room, call each other on mobile phones, or use any online chat facility to collude.
You can’t prevent players from colluding, but you can design the game to minimize 
the effects of cheating. You should consider in what ways the following types of 
collusion might affect your game:
■ Sharing secret knowledge. Does the player ever have secret knowledge that she 
can share to someone else’s beneﬁ t? In the trivia game described previously, some 
players receive the correct answer before the time runs out. Withholding this infor-
mation prevents collusion.
■ Passing cards (or anything else) under the table. Does the game include 
mechanisms to transfer assets from one player to another? Is there any way to 
abuse these mechanisms?
■ Taking a dive. What are the consequences if one player deliberately plays to 
lose? If you allow gambling on matches (even if only with play money or points), 
you should look out for this.
If you’re designing a game in which the competition mode is supposed to be every 
player for herself, try imagining what would happen if you made it a team game in 
which you encouraged players to collaborate. If it’s already a team game, try to 
imagine what would happen if one player on the team spied for the other team.
Technical Security
People feel a strong impulse to test the limits of computer software—to see what it 
will do with nonsensical inputs (such as ﬁ ring upon their own troops in a war 
game). Similarly, players often think of ways to do things that the designers never 
intended or expected. Sometimes these unanticipated maneuvers, such as using the 
rocket launcher to propel the player upward in Quake, even become standard tactics.
Making unexpected but legal moves is not cheating; one can argue that designers 
should anticipate these tactics or that testers should discover them. But other forms 
of cheating, such as hacking the game’s software or data ﬁ les, are clearly unfair. In 
a single-player game, it doesn’t really matter, but cheating in multiplayer games 
presents a more serious problem. People who wouldn’t dream of cheating their 
close friends in person—say, playing poker around the living room table—happily 
cheat strangers when protected by the distance and anonymity that an online 
game offers. 
Players have a moral right to expect a fair game when they’re playing against other 
people, and they have a legal right to a fair game as well if they’re paying money 
for the privilege. This becomes even more crucial if they’re playing for prizes. 
Although all game software comes with a disclaimer that the publisher sells the 
software as is and without any warranty, the moment you start to give out prizes 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

604 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
with monetary value, you must be very careful to ensure that your game is fair if 
you don’t want to end up in court.
The legitimate players aren’t the enemy, of course, but the handful of cheaters are. 
We lock our doors at night not to protect ourselves from the honest majority of the 
population but to protect ourselves from the dishonest minority. You will have to 
design your game with the same consideration in mind.
USE A SECURE TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOL
It takes an extremely dedicated hacker to tamper with the data stream between the 
client software and the server, but it takes only one. If the stakes are high enough, 
someone will decide the reward is worth the time spent. To foil hackers, your soft-
ware must use a secure telecommunications protocol. Designing such a thing is a 
programming problem and is beyond the scope of this book, but if you’re designing 
an online game, you should be sure that the telecommunications protocol you use 
provides the following features.
■ First, all data should be encrypted to prevent users from understanding it out-
right. Each packet of data should be sent with suitable error-checking and error-
correcting facilities, which will enable the software to detect whether the data has 
lost integrity in transmission. Even though Internet communications are far more 
reliable than the old modem-based systems were, it’s always a good idea to verify 
that the arriving data is correct.
■ Second, you might want to consider a heartbeat mechanism. In this system, your 
client software sends a short packet to your server at regular intervals, even when 
the client doesn’t need to transmit data, simply to tell the server that the client is 
still present. This enables you to detect disconnections. If the nature of the game 
allows the client to remain silent indeﬁ nitely, the server doesn’t know if the client 
has disconnected or if the player is just thinking.
■ Each packet should include a unique serial number, to indicate the correct 
order of packets and to prevent spurious packets from being inserted by unauthor-
ized means.
DON’T STORE SENSITIVE DATA ON THE PLAYER’S COMPUTER
A game typically contains two kinds of data about a player. Your game needs to 
keep settings or preferences about the way the player appears and likes to play, as 
well as information that’s actually relevant to the game state: the player’s position, 
score, possessions, and so on. In Monopoly, for instance, the player’s playing piece 
(hat, shoe, car, and so on) belongs in the former category; it doesn’t matter to the 
state of the game which token the player uses. However, the player’s properties, 
cash, and position on the board belong in the latter category; changes to those 
attributes affect the player’s status in the game.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ONLINE GAMING 
605
 CHAPTER 21
This second kind of information shouldn’t be stored on the player’s own computer. 
Even with encryption techniques, you have to assume that someone will tamper 
with any data kept on the player’s machine to give that player an unfair advantage. 
If your game truly generates too much sensitive data about each character to store it 
all on the server, at least store a checksum over the data when the player logs out so 
that when he logs back in again, you can check his data and determine whether it 
has been improperly modiﬁ ed in the meantime.
DON’T SEND THE PLAYER DATA HE ISN’T SUPPOSED TO HAVE
A common characteristic of real-time strategy games is the fog of war, in which 
unexplored areas of the map appear dark and the player cannot detect movements 
of the enemy unless a friendly unit nearby can plausibly see them. Single-player 
games store all of this information in the player’s computer; it’s just not visible to 
the player. Online games should not send any such hidden information to the 
player. If the player hacks the game to lift the fog of war, he can see unexplored 
areas and watch the movements of enemy units, giving him a signiﬁ cant advantage 
over his opponents.
DON’T LET THE CLIENT PERFORM SENSITIVE OPERATIONS
In designing a client/server game, you must always strike a balance between the 
amount of processing that the server does and the amount that the client does. It 
saves CPU time on the server for you to ofﬂ oad as much of the processing work 
onto the client as you can, but it isn’t always safe. Suppose, for example, that you’re 
designing a simple role-playing game in which the player occasionally encounters 
monsters and must ﬁ ght them. It reduces the load on the server if the server sends 
the client some information about the current monster and lets the ﬁ ght take place 
entirely on the player’s computer. After the ﬁ ght, the client sends a message back to 
the server reporting whether the player won, lost, or ran away, but this presents a 
danger: If the player hacks the client, he can program it to report that he wins 
every ﬁ ght. In fact, the server, not the client, should perform the computations for 
the ﬁ ght and determine whether the player won or lost.
Persistent Worlds
A good many online games are not really games at all by the deﬁ nition you learned 
in Chapter 1, “Games and Video Games.” Persistent worlds such as World of Warcraft,
EverQuest, Anarchy Online, and so on constitute permanent environments in which 
players can play, retaining the state of their avatar from one session to another. 
Persistent worlds present a number of special problems and design requirements, 
which this section discusses at a general level. For a more in-depth discussion, read 
Designing Virtual Worlds by Richard Bartle (Bartle, 2003), and Developing Online 
Games: An Insider’s Guide by Jessica Mulligan and Bridgette Patrovsky (Mulligan and 
Patrovsky, 2003).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

606 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
Persistent worlds signiﬁ cantly predate today’s popular graphical MMOGs. Since 
1978, a small but dedicated community of developers has been building, playing, 
and studying text-based persistent worlds called MUDs (multiuser dungeons or 
domains, depending on who you talk to) that could be played by groups of people 
over the Internet. In these worlds, in which players interact by typing commands,
a rich culture of online role-playing evolved. 
This book won’t go into MUD design in any detail here; there is no commercial 
market for MUDs, and you can already ﬁ nd a vast amount of literature about the 
subject on the Internet. Many of the design problems of today’s MMOGs, particu-
larly those relating to social interactions among players, were solved—or at least 
studied—long ago in the MUD community.
How Persistent Worlds Differ from Ordinary Games
Part of the appeal of computer games is the environment in which the player ﬁ nds 
herself: a fantasy world where magic really works or behind enemy lines in World 
War II. Another part is the role the gamer will play in the game: detective or pilot 
or knight-errant. Yet another is the gameplay itself, the nature of the challenges the 
player faces and the actions she may take to overcome them. And, of course, there 
is the goal of the game, its victory condition: to halt the enemy invasion or ﬁ nd the 
magic ring. The victory is usually the conclusion of a story that the player experi-
ences and contributes to.
Persistent worlds offer some of these things but not all of them, and there are sig-
niﬁ cant differences between the kinds of experiences that persistent worlds offer 
and those that conventional games offer.
STORY
Because persistent worlds have so many players, and because they are intended to 
continue indeﬁ nitely, the traditional narrative arc of a single-player game doesn’t 
apply. Persistent worlds may offer storylike quests, but they always return to the world 
eventually; you can’t have a once-and-for-all ending in the sense that a story does.
The setting of a persistent world consists of the environment itself and the overall 
conditions of life there. It can be a dangerous place or a safe one, a rich place or a 
poor one, a place of tyranny or a place of democracy. You can challenge players to 
respond to problems in the world as it is or to problems that you introduce, 
whether slowly or suddenly.
The goal is a quest or errand that the player undertakes as an individual or with 
others. Goals can be small-scale (eliminate the pack of wild dogs that has been 
marauding through the sheep ﬂ ocks) or large-scale (everyone in the town gets 
together to rebuild the defenses in anticipation of an invasion). Most persistent 
worlds offer large numbers of quests from which players may choose.
NOTE Persistent 
worlds used to be 
commonly called 
massively multiplayer 
online role-playing 
games or MMORPGs, 
because the earliest 
ones belonged to the 
role-playing genre. 
More recently the 
industry has begun to 
call them massively 
multiplayer online 
games (MMOGs) in-
stead, to reﬂ ect their 
growing diversity.
NOTE The MMOG A
Tale in the Desert is un-
usual in that its world 
regularly comes to an 
end and starts again 
fresh in a new edi-
tion, called a Telling.
Although the game 
persists for months at a 
time, it does not persist 
indeﬁ nitely.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ONLINE GAMING 
607
 CHAPTER 21
As a designer, you probably want players to feel as if they are the ﬁ rst ones ever to 
undertake a particular quest, or to explore an area of the game world. Ordinary 
computer games allow you to evoke that feeling, because the game world is created 
fresh when the player starts up the game program. In a persistent world, on the 
other hand, only those who logged in on its ﬁ rst day of operation are the ﬁ rst to 
experience a quest or explore a new area. Furthermore, those who went before will 
always tell those who arrive later what to expect. In short, it’s impossible to keep 
anything secret about a persistent world. As soon as a few players know it, they’ll 
tell the other players.
Chapter 7, “Storytelling and Narrative,” introduced the emergent narrative: stories 
that emerge from the core mechanics of a game. In a persistent world, stories 
emerge not so much from the core mechanics as from interactions among the
players. The best emergent stories (those that make the player feel as if he’s
participating in a story created by a great writer) occur in purely role-playing
environments with almost no gamelike elements. In effect, the story experience
in a persistent world comes about when the players are excellent role-players: good 
at acting and improvisational theater. As a designer, you cannot force good stories 
to emerge; it depends too much on the imagination and talent of the participants.
THE PLAYER’S ROLE
In a single-player, plot-driven game, the player’s role is deﬁ ned by the actions he is 
allowed to take and is constrained by the requirements of the story. In a persistent 
world, the player doesn’t follow a single storyline, so he may, in theory, choose 
from a larger variety of things to do and has more opportunities to deﬁ ne his own 
role. The early persistent worlds offered only a limited number of roles, but modern 
ones are increasingly rich and varied.
As the designer, you must supply an assortment of possible roles the player may 
take on and make those roles meaningful in your world. You should also give the 
player the freedom to change her role (though not always easily or immediately) as 
she sees ﬁ t. Because the world continues indeﬁ nitely without coming to a narrative 
conclusion, you can’t expect the player to want to play the same way forever. Just as 
people change careers and hobbies over time, players need to be able to change roles.
GAMEPLAY
Finally, there’s the question of the gameplay. Without a victory condition, you 
can’t simply offer the player a predeﬁ ned sequence of challenges and achievements 
as her ultimate objective. In the familiar persistent worlds designed like role-play-
ing games, the player’s objective is to advance her character. She (usually) accomp-
lishes this by ﬁ ghting AI-controlled opponents, such as monsters, although she 
could also attain many other things as well: wealth, political power, fame (or noto-
riety), and so on.
TIP If your game 
offers too few things 
to do, it will fail. Your 
game design must be 
expansive. Even the 
coolest game mechanic 
becomes tiresome after 
a time. You have to 
supply alternative 
ways of playing or 
alternative ways of 
experiencing the 
world. Otherwise, the 
players will go to 
another world where 
they can have new 
experiences. You will 
need to release addi-
tions to the game or, 
better yet, completely 
different subgames 
embedded in the 
actual game.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

608 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
In a single-player game, the player tries to read the designer’s mind to some extent, 
to ﬁ gure out what you want him to do, and then he does it. His play is often reac-
tive, a response to challenges thrown at him. In a persistent world, the player 
decides for himself what he wants to do. He seeks out challenges if he feels like it, 
but he can spend all his time socializing if he prefers. His gameplay—and, indeed, 
the entire nature of the experience—is expressive and active rather than reactive. 
This quality of persistent-world play has profound effects on the design of such 
worlds, as you will see later in this section.
WHERE DOES SECOND LIFE FIT IN?
Second Life is a widely publicized online environment that allows users (known in the 
environment as residents) to build landscapes and a nearly unlimited variety of artifacts, 
including avatars and buildings, and sell them to one another. They may also interact 
with each other in a wide variety of ways. Users access the virtual world through a client, 
just as players of MMOGs do. However, unlike MMOGs, Second Life does not offer quests 
to achieve, combat or other types of challenges, a system for leveling characters up, or 
any of the other gameplay features typical of persistent worlds. It is simply an environ-
ment, and what happens in it is entirely up to the users. They can build their own games 
within the game world if they want to, but the system does not include many tools for 
implementing and enforcing the rules. All land in the game consists of islands in the sea 
that are owned by the residents (except for a few islands used for training new arrivals). 
Users must purchase an island in the sea from the operators, Linden Labs, if they want to 
construct their own environment. A built-in scripting language allows objects in the 
game to perform behaviors when a resident interacts with them.
Residents in Second Life may instantaneously teleport or ﬂ y their avatars to any location 
in the world that is not private (most are open). Residents use the virtual world for social 
interaction, personal expression, education, evangelism, and as a means of offering virtual 
goods and services for sale. A number of corporations and a small number of countries 
have opened “ofﬁ ces” in Second Life as a means of informing people about themselves.
Because every object and even the landscape in Second Life may be modiﬁ ed or deleted 
at any time, the user’s client software must continually download the graphics for the 
virtual world. This is not true of most MMOGs, where the landscape is largely static and 
cannot be modiﬁ ed by the players. The constant data transmission required by Second 
Life creates a time lag in displaying the graphics that would be unacceptable in most 
MMOGs. Second Life is not intended for real-time play the way World of Warcraft is.
For the moment, Second Life is unique or nearly so. It costs nothing to use, although resi-
dents must purchase Linden dollars (the in-game currency) with real money if they want 
to purchase in-world artifacts, and there is a price for some premium services. But it is 
not an MMOG.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ONLINE GAMING 
609
 CHAPTER 21
The Four Types of Players
In 1997, MUD developer Richard Bartle wrote a seminal article called “Hearts, 
Clubs, Diamonds, Spades: Players Who Suit MUDs” for the ﬁ rst issue of the Journal 
of Virtual Environments (Bartle, 1997). He proposed that MUD players fall into
four categories depending on whether they enjoy either acting on (manipulating, 
exploiting, or controlling) or interacting with (learning about and communicating 
with) either the world or the other players (see Figure 21.1). Those who enjoy act-
ing on other players he dubbed Killers, or clubs; those who enjoy interacting with 
other players he called Socializers, or hearts. Those who enjoy acting on the world 
he described as Achievers, or diamonds; those who enjoy interacting with the 
world he referred to as Explorers, or spades.
Bartle went on to claim that a healthy MUD community required a certain propor-
tion of each of these types of players and that adjusting the game design to attract 
or discourage any given type of player would tend to inﬂ uence the numbers of oth-
ers as well. In effect, a persistent world is a sort of ecology in which the players’ 
styles of play inﬂ uence the balance of the population. Bartle drew his data from 
personal observation rather than rigorous statistical analysis, so his conclusions can 
certainly be questioned. Nevertheless, his grouping of player types proved to be use-
ful not only in the design of MUDs, but in graphical persistent worlds as well.
Creating an Avatar
Playing in persistent worlds is more than merely a form of gameplay; it’s also a 
form of expression. The ﬁ rst thing a player does when she joins a persistent world
is to create an avatar, or character who represents her in the game, one of the most 
expressive things she can do. Chapter 5, “Creative and Expressive Play,” discusses 
avatar creation at greater length.
ENJOY ACTING
WORLD-
ORIENTED
ENJOY INTERACTING
PLAYER-
ORIENTED
Socializers
Explorers
Achievers
Killers
FIGURE 21.1
Richard Bartle’s four 
types of players


--- PAGE BREAK ---

610 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
If you’re making an online role-playing game that includes traditional avatar attri-
butes such as speed, strength, and so on, consult Chapter 15, “Role-Playing Games,” 
for more information.
Players like to maintain a proﬁ le listing some of their intangible attributes in order 
to identify and describe their avatars to other players. Proﬁ les can include such 
things as:
■ Unique name or handle. Unless your game allows totally anonymous play, peo-
ple will need some way of identifying their avatars by name. That way, a player’s 
name can appear in documents, on leader boards, in chat rooms and bulletin 
boards, and so on.
■ Physical appearance. People clearly need to be able to tell one character from 
another on the screen. The physical appearance of avatars should be as customiz-
able as you can afford to make it. Even if appearance does not affect gameplay, 
players identify with and respond to physical appearances.
■ History or experience. Players like to record their characters’ achievements
for others to see. Records can include experience levels, quests undertaken, kills
in battle, or any other accomplishments the player might be proud of. You’ll have 
to decide whether some players will want to keep some of these things private and, 
if so, whether they should be allowed to.
■ Reputation. The system computes and stores the reputation as a number or sym-
bol based on the player’s play or on complaints or praise received about the player. 
(The eBay auction web site includes a simple reputation system.) Some games use 
the reputation mechanism as a way of automatically tagging players who fre-
quently take advantage of others. The reputation attribute warns other players, 
“This person is dangerous” or “This person is trustworthy.” Beware, however:
An automated system is subject to abuse through collusion if you don’t place
limits on it. If you offer a player the opportunity to repair a bad reputation through 
some apparently virtuous action such as donating money to another character,
he can simply donate money repeatedly to a friend, who promptly donates it all 
back to him.
■ Player autobiography. It’s fun for a player to make up a history for his charac-
ter, a background that introduces that character to others in the world. It’s another 
form of self-expression. However, if children play in your world, you will need to 
have a real person approve autobiographies for suitability.
You might or might not want to include important gameplay attributes in the
player’s proﬁ le; it depends on how making such information public affects the 
gameplay. Does allowing a player to hide attributes from the world constitute a 
legitimate part of gameplay or an unfair advantage? (Consider Monopoly, which 
does not allow players to hide their property cards under the table but allows
everyone to see what all players own.)


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ONLINE GAMING 
611
 CHAPTER 21
World Models
If you plan to offer more than just a chat room, you must give players something
to do. The types of things that you give them to do and the rewards they earn for 
doing those things constitute the world model. Raph Koster identiﬁ ed ﬁ ve classic 
world models, although you can undoubtedly devise more. Yours may include ele-
ments from more than one of Koster’s original ﬁ ve, listed here:
■ Scavenger model. Players collect things and return them to places of safety.
The game is primarily a large treasure hunt, and players don’t risk losing anything 
they’ve collected.
■ Social model. The world exists primarily to provide an expressive space. The 
fun comes from role-playing in character; most goals represent social achievement 
(political power, adulation, notoriety, and so on). Players use their characters’ attri-
butes as a basis for role-playing rather than computer-managed combat. 
■ Dungeons & Dragons model. In games based on this, the best-known model, 
the player is primarily in conﬂ ict with the environment, ﬁ ghting NPCs for ad-
vancement and doing some scavenging along the way. Such games rely heavily
on the functional attributes of the avatar for gameplay and include feedback mecha-
nisms: Defeating enemies advances the character, which requires the game to offer 
tougher enemies next time. Such worlds tend to include quests as a form of narra-
tive and a way of offering challenges to the players.
■ Player-versus-Player (PvP) model. In this sort of world, players advance by 
defeating one another at contests, often characterized as combat. Players advance 
through a combination of their natural skill and rewards from winning battles. For 
this to work successfully, they need to be reasonably evenly matched; you can’t 
have the old-timers beating up the newcomers all the time. EVE Online is perhaps 
Spore broke new ground in a number of ways, and one was its use of the Internet. Spore 
is not a multiplayer online game in the usual sense. It does not maintain a single, central 
game world and players cannot interact with one another directly. However, when a 
player creates a creature or a building in the later levels of Spore, the game uploads the 
player’s creation to a database stored on a server maintained by Electronic Arts, the pub-
lisher. These data are available to all other players, which means that one player’s creature 
may appear in another player’s world. This makes the player’s experience of the game 
extremely rich, as creations from thousands of players may turn up in his game world. 
However, there is still no direct interaction with other players. A player can download a 
copy of another player’s creature from the server (in fact, this happens automatically), 
but he cannot intentionally inﬂ uence another player’s experience. Will Wright, the 
designer, jokingly called Spore a massively single-player online game.
SPORE: A MASSIVELY SINGLE-PLAYER ONLINE GAME


--- PAGE BREAK ---

612 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
the most cutthroat of the successful PvP games, with very little in the rules to
prevent players from abusing newcomers.
■ Builder model. This somewhat rare sort of world enables players to construct 
things and actually modify the world in which they play. It’s a highly expressive 
form of entertainment. People get kudos not for their ﬁ ghting skills, but for their 
aesthetic and architectural ones, both intangible qualities.
Avatar Death
In any persistent world that includes combat, you must decide whether it’s possible 
for the player’s avatar to die and what will happen if it does. As in other games, ava-
tar death must be accompanied by a disincentive of some kind or combat will not 
be a meaningful part of gameplay. The trick is to ﬁ nd a disincentive that is propor-
tional to the likelihood of the avatar’s death. It is a question of balance: If the 
avatar can easily be killed through no fault of the player (such as through igno-
rance or bad luck), then the cost of dying—the disincentive—should be low, but if 
the player really has to be stupid to get his avatar killed, the cost should be high. 
Some examples follow.
PERMANENT DEATH
In the most extreme case, the avatar dies and cannot be resurrected. The player 
loses all property that he owns (in which case you must decide what happens to 
that property) and must start over from scratch with a new avatar. This makes 
sense in games of short duration, but seldom in persistent worlds. Players in persis-
tent worlds put too much time and effort into building up their avatars for you to 
ask them to start over.
RESURRECTION WITH REDUCED ATTRIBUTES
Designers commonly penalize the player for letting her avatar die by bringing the 
avatar back to life with reduced functional attributes—with less strength or per-
haps fewer skills. In effect, you give the player a bit of a setback in her quest to 
grow a powerful avatar. Players ﬁ nd this irritating, so fear of incurring such a set-
back discourages risky play, but the penalty makes a certain amount of sense. If a 
gang of club-wielding trolls beats the avatar to death, the avatar ought to feel pretty 
lousy for a while when she comes back to life!
RESURRECTION WITH SOME PROPERTY MISSING
Another classic disincentive for dying involves loss of money, gear, clothes, and 
other items in the avatar’s inventory at the time. How much of his property he 
loses and what becomes of it can vary considerably from game to game. You can 
also allow players to have a vault in the game in which they can keep items that 
they’re not carrying with them, and these items can remain safely in the vault for 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ONLINE GAMING 
613
 CHAPTER 21
use by their resurrected avatar. You might as well include this feature because, if 
you don’t, the players will create a second character that they never play with, 
known in MMOG parlance as a mule, to hold their primary avatar’s things for them.
The Player-Killer (PK) Problem
No aspect of the design of persistent worlds has been debated more than this one 
simple question: Should players’ avatars be allowed to kill one another? The next 
few sections summarize some of the issues so that you can make an informed deci-
sion for your own game.
Most designers offer persistent worlds resembling role-playing games in that players 
advance in skill and power through combat. It’s generally more interesting if this 
combat occurs against another player rather than against an NPC, for several reasons. 
First, another player’s avatar is more likely to be carrying interesting and valuable 
objects worth looting (if the game permits looting) than a randomly generated 
NPC; unlike an NPC, another player will have kept only valuable items and gotten 
rid of anything not worth keeping. Second, ﬁ ghting another player is a social expe-
rience, which an NPC cannot offer. Finally, a player can use his human intelligence 
to put up a better ﬁ ght; an NPC has to use AI, which is seldom as sophisticated.
THE ULTIMA ONLINE EXPERIENCE
The designers of Ultima Online initially permitted players to kill one another
without restraint (except in towns), hoping that players would establish their own 
justice mechanisms within the game. Unfortunately, the world quickly began to 
resemble present-day Somalia: unremitting random violence, feuds, continual
victimization of the weak by the strong, and petty warlords or gangs of bandits 
controlling areas of turf. Players engaging in this behavior became known as player-
killers, or PK players. No satisfactory solution arose from the players, partly because 
the software did not offer any genuinely painful punishment mechanisms for them 
to use against offenders. (In real life, we either lock murderers away for a very long 
time or kill them permanently, neither of which any for-pay persistent world can 
afford to do.) Designers then tried a variety of different automated mechanisms for 
encouraging justice, but players found ways of exploiting most such mechanisms. 
In the end, the developers threw up their hands and divided the world into shards
(separate, independent versions of the world) with different rules for each. Some 
allowed player-versus-player (PvP) combat, and others did not. Approximately 80 
percent of the players chose to play in non-PvP shards.
JUSTICE MECHANISMS
Koster offers the following summary of approaches to regulating PvP combat, 
whether fatal or not:


--- PAGE BREAK ---

614 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
■ No automated regulation. Anyone can attack anyone, and administrators or 
social mechanisms (vigilante justice) deal with rogue players. Koster estimates that 
as much as 40 percent of the potential audience will avoid this type of game 
because they don’t like PvP.
■ Flagging of criminals. Player killing is considered a criminal act within the 
game’s rules: not prevented by the system, but wrong. The server automatically 
detects criminal behavior and ﬂ ags the criminals, who become fair game for others 
to attack. The system can also reduce the attributes of criminals, in effect penaliz-
ing them for their behavior. This can be used for thievery and other crimes as well 
as murder, matching the reduction to the severity of the crime. Single-player RPGs 
use a version of this system too: players may behave in good or bad ways, but those 
who behave badly frequently suffer penalties—NPCs will not talk to them or trade 
with them, for example.
■ Reputation systems. This is similar to ﬂ agging, except that players decide when 
to report someone for criminal behavior and can choose not to do so. In practice, 
they almost always do, however.
■ PvP switch. Players indicate their willingness to ﬁ ght other players by setting a 
switch (a binary attribute) in their proﬁ le, becoming either a PvP player, who can 
attack and be attacked, or a non-PvP player, who cannot attack or be attacked by 
others. You can use this switch to give temporary consent for duels and arena-
based combat. Unfortunately, this mechanism creates suspension-of-disbelief 
problems when players use area-effect weapons such as a magic ﬁ reball spell: Three 
PvP players get roasted by a ﬁ reball that leaves a non-PvP player in the same vicin-
ity untouched because he cannot be attacked.
■ Safe games; no PvP allowed. This is the least troublesome solution, but even 
this approach has its hazards. Players will still ﬁ nd ways of abusing one another—
for example, by luring an unsuspecting newcomer into an area where he will be 
attacked by a monster. Koster estimates that this approach will cost you up to 20 
percent of your potential audience, that 20 percent being those players who like PvP.
You can also divide the world into safe and dangerous geographic zones, but in 
practice people tend to either stay in the safe zones or play near the edges, hoping 
to lure a potential victim over the line without his realizing it.
FACTION-BASED PVP
A number of persistent worlds allow players to belong to factions. These can be as 
small as gangs or as large as entire nations at war. The rules enable players to attack 
members of enemy factions but not members of their own faction—in effect, it’s 
team play. Different factions control different regions, so players can generally tell 
safe areas from unsafe areas. For the most part, this arrangement solves the random 
violence problem that initially plagued Ultima Online.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

ONLINE GAMING 
615
 CHAPTER 21
THE BOTTOM LINE ON PLAYER KILLING
You cannot please everybody, so you will beneﬁ t from deciding whom you want to 
please and tailoring your environment to them. In a game that allows player kill-
ing, a certain number of players will inevitably abuse the system, exploiting their 
superior strength to victimize weaker ones without ever putting themselves at risk. 
You can’t please them without also providing them with victims who won’t be 
pleased, so it’s not worth trying. Ultimately, you need to bear two things in mind:
■ It’s a fantasy world. That means it’s supposed to be enjoyable, escapist enter-
tainment. People don’t fantasize about being harassed, bullied, or abused. A fair 
contest among consenting players is one thing; perpetual harassment or an 
ambush by a gang is quite another.
■ People pay to play. This makes your world distinctly different from the real 
world. The real world doesn’t owe us anything; we survive as best we can. But as a 
game provider, you’ve taken the players’ money, so you have obligations to them. 
Just exactly what those obligations are is open to debate, of course, but if players 
don’t feel that you are meeting your obligations, they will leave.
PLAYER EXPECTATIONS
Players have higher expectations of the virtual world than of the real world. For example, 
players expect all labor to result in proﬁ t; they expect life to be fair; they expect to be 
protected from aggression before the fact, not just having to seek redress after the fact; 
they expect problems to be resolved quickly; and they expect that their integrity will be 
assumed to be beyond reproach. In other words, they expect too much, and you will not 
be able to supply it all. The trick is to manage their expectations.
The Nature of Time
In a single-player computer game, you maintain a great deal of control over the 
relationship between game time and real time. Most games run at many times the 
speed of real time, and a player often experiences a simulated day in a game world 
in an hour or less of real time. You can also hand over control of the speed of time 
to the player when you want to; it’s not uncommon for players in combat ﬂ ight 
simulators to speed up time when ﬂ ying to and from the combat zones and then 
slow down to real time again when they get there. Finally, you can skip time 
entirely—useful during periods when the player’s avatar sleeps. You can blank the 
screen for a moment and then put up a text message that says, “8 hours later… ,” 
and continue with the game.
But you can’t use any of these options in multiplayer games. You obviously can’t 
allow some players to move through time at different speeds than others, and you 
can’t skip time unless you force all players to skip that time together. Although 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

616 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GAME DESIGN
game time might be faster than real time, game time must proceed at the same 
ﬁ xed pace for everyone.
As a result, you must be careful about designing time-consuming activities. 
EverQuest, for example, employs a mechanism called meditation, in which players 
simply have to wait around for a while to restore their magic powers. There’s no 
way to speed up this process—it literally does involve waiting. Nor can they log out 
of the game while meditating and log back in again later when the meditation pro-
cess ﬁ nishes. Players can’t even switch to a different process on their computers. 
Verant, the developers of EverQuest, eventually built in a mini-game for players to 
play while waiting—a patch but not a real solution. If your game contains features 
so boring that you have to distract the players, you need to rethink the features.
Single-player games can be stopped and restarted at the player’s discretion—a key 
consideration for designers of such games. If the player can save the game, he can 
essentially reverse time by going back to a previous point in the game and replay-
ing the game from that point. This robs single-player games of the emotional 
impact of events because anything that happens, good or bad, can be reversed by 
reloading a saved version of the game. You can design the game to include some 
inevitable events, but of course, the more of these you include, the less interactive 
the game is.
In an online game, time is irreversible. Even if you had a convenient way to reverse 
time, you can’t reasonably ask all your players to agree to reverse time to an earlier 
point (although the managers of some persistent worlds have had to roll back to a 
saved state when the game got into problems). In the ordinary course of events, 
when an event occurs in an online game, it’s done and can’t be undone. 
Persistent World Economies
If the players in a persistent world can collect and trade things of value, then
the world includes an economy. Chapter 18, “Construction and Management 
Simulations,” discussed economies in some detail. Economies are much easier to 
design and tune in a single-player game than they are in a persistent world. You 
can control the actions of a single person fairly strictly; in a persistent world,
thousands of people interact within your game in ways that you might not have 
anticipated.
The original Ultima Online had a completely self-contained, closed economy with a 
ﬁ xed number of resources ﬂ owing around and around. You could mine iron ore, 
smelt it into iron, and forge the iron into weapons. Using the weapons would cause 
them to deteriorate, and when worn, they would return to the pool of raw iron ore 
available for mining. This last step wasn’t strictly realistic, but it did close the loop.
The designers, however, didn’t anticipate that players would hoard objects without 
using them. Because unused objects didn’t go back into the pool, the iron ore 
quickly ran out, and as resources dwindled, inﬂ ation ran rampant. The players


--- PAGE BREAK ---

